Fall from Innocence: 
The Body 

STEPHEN KING 

Level 5 

Retold by Robin Waterfield 
Series Editors: Andy Hopkins and Jocelyn Potter 

Pearson Education Limited 

Edinburgh Gate, Harlow, 

Essex CM20 2JE, England 

and Associated Companies throughout the world. 

ISBN 0 582 41817 8 

Fall from Innocence: The Body from DIFFERENT SEASONS by Stephen King 

Copyright © Stephen King 1982 

Published by arrangement with Viking Penguin, a division of Penguin Books USA, Inc. 

This adaptation first published by Penguin Books 1994 

Published by Addison Wesley Longman Limited and Penguin Books Ltd. 1998 

New edition first published 1999 

9 10 

Text copyright © Robin Waterfield 1994 
Illustrations copyright © Ian Andrew 1994 

All rights reserved 

The moral right of the adapter and of the illustrator has been asserted 

Typeset by RefineCatch Limited, Bungay, Suffolk 

Set in 11/14pt Monotype Bembo 

Printed in Spain by Mateu Cromo, S.A. Pinto (Madrid) 

All rights reserved; no part of this publication may he reproduced, stored 

in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, 

electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the 

prior written permission of the Publishers. 

Published by Pearson Education Limited in association with 
Penguin Books Ltd., both companies being subsidiaries of Pearson Plc 

For a complete list of titles available in the Penguin Readers series please write to your local 
Pearson Education office or contact: Penguin Readers Marketing Department, 
Pearson Education, Edinburgh Gate, Harlow, Essex, CM20 2JE. 

Contents 

Introduction 

Chapter 1 
Chapter 2 
Chapter 3 
Chapter 4 
Chapter 5 
Chapter 6 
Chapter 7 
Chapter 8 
Chapter 9 
Chapter 10 
Chapter 11 
Chapter 12 
Chapter 13 
Chapter 14 
Chapter 15 
Chapter 16 
Chapter 17 
Chapter 18 
Chapter 19 
Chapter 20 
Chapter 21 
Chapter 22 
Chapter 23 
Chapter 24 
Chapter 25 
Chapter 26 
Chapter 27 

Activities 

The Hardest Things to Say 
The Tree House Gang 
The Forests of Maine 
A Jar of Pennies 
Making Plans 
Brother Denny 
The Gun 
The Railway 
The Dump 
Milo and Chopper 
Night-Sweats 
The Bridge 
The Loser's Life 
Darkness in the Forest 
A Dream of Deep Water 
The Deer 
Leeches 
Short Shadows, Dusty Shoes 
A Serious Matter 
The Body 
Ace Merrill 
Hailstones 
A Twenty-Year-Old Dream 
Love Has Teeth 
Empty Kitchen 
Some People Drown 
Tears for a Friend 

page 

iv 

1 
1 
5 
6 
8 
9 
11 
15 
17 
20 
25 
28 
33 
38 
40 
44 
47 
50 
51 
52 
58 
62 
65 
67 
69 
69 
72 

Introduction 

'So what's this all about, Vern?' Teddy asked. He and Chris were still 
playing cards; I was reaching for a detective magazine. 

Vern Tessio said: 'You guys want to go and see a dead body?' 
Everybody stopped. 

Gordie Lachance and his three friends are always ready for an 
adventure. So when a boy dies out in the forest, it's a chance to see 
something they have never seen in their lives: a dead body. 

But for the four boys, their journey will teach them as much 
about life as about death. As they face the dangers on their way, they 
begin to learn what it is to grow up — and nothing will ever be the 
same for them again. 

With the enormous success of books such as The Shining, Salem's 
Lot and Misery, Stephen King is one of the world's highest-earning 
writers. There are over 150 million copies of his novels in print and 
he makes two million dollars a month from his books and the films 
made of his books. 

He grew up in a poor family in Portland, Maine in the USA, but 
he went to university and became a teacher. However, he gave up 
teaching and became a full-time writer in 1973 after his first novel, 
Carrie. 

The Body is different from most of King's work. It is not a horror 
story, although there are a few unpleasant moments. It is based 
on his own childhood in Maine, and shows a softer side of his' 
imagination. It was filmed in 1986 as Stand by Me, with River 
Phoenix as Chris Chambers. 

You can also read Stephen King's The Breathing Method and 
Misery in Penguin Readers. 

IV 

Chapter 1 
The Hardest Things to Say 

The most important things are the hardest things to say. They 
are the things you get ashamed of, because words make them 
smaller. When they were in your head they were limitless; but 
when they come out they seem to be no bigger than normal 
things. But that's not all. The most important things he too 
close to wherever your secret heart is buried; they are clues that 
could guide your enemies to a prize they would love to steal. It's 
hard and painful for you to talk about these things . . . and then 
people just look at you strangely. They haven't understood 
what you've said at all, or why you almost cried while you were 
saying it. 

I was twelve, nearly thirteen, when I first saw a dead person. It 
happened in 1960, a long time ago . . . although sometimes it 
doesn't seem very long to me. Especially on the nights when I wake 
up from dreams in which the hail falls into his open eyes. 

Chapter 2 
The Tree House Gang 

We had a tree house in a big tree which hung over some empty 
ground in Castle Rock. It was a kind of club, although it had no 
name. There were five or six regulars and some other pussies who 
came and went. We'd let them come up when we were playing 
cards for money and we needed some fresh blood. 

The sides of the tree house were made out of wood, and the roof 
was metal we had taken from the dump, looking over our shoulders 
all the time because the manager of the dump had a dog which ate 
children for breakfast, or so people said. We found a screen door out 
there on the same day. It stopped the flies getting in, but it was really 

rusty. It didn't matter what time of day you looked out through that 
screen door: it always looked like sunset. 

Besides playing cards, the club was a good place to go and smoke 
cigarettes and look at girlie books. We built a secret space under the 
floor to hide magazines and cigarette packets when somebody's 
father decided to do the Me And My Son Are Best Friends routine 
and visit us. 

That summer had been the driest and hottest since 1907, the 
newspapers said, and on that Friday in September, a few days before 
school started again, the grass was dry and brown. Teddy and Chris 
and I were up in the club in the morning, complaining about 
school being so near and playing cards and telling the same 
jokes we'd told each other a hundred times before. Teddy was 
laughing his peculiar laugh at the jokes — Eeee-eee-eee, like a finger-
nail scratching on a board. He was strange; we all knew it. Close to 
being thirteen like the rest of us, the thick glasses and his deafness 
made him seem like an old man sometimes. 

In spite of the glasses Teddy couldn't see very well, and he often 
misunderstood the things people said to him. His eyesight was just 
naturally bad, but there was nothing natural about what had hap-
pened to his ears. Back in those days, when it was the fashion to get 
your hair cut really short, Teddy had Castle Rock's first Beatle 
haircut — four years before anyone in America had even heard of the 
Beatles. He kept his ears covered because they looked like two 
lumps of warm wax. 

One day when Teddy was eight, his father had got angry with 
him for breaking a plate. His mother was out at work. Teddy's dad 
took him over to the big oven at the back of the kitchen and pushed 
the side of Teddy's head down against one of the burner plates. He 
held it down for about ten seconds. Then he pulled Teddy up by 
the hair and did the other side. Then he called the hospital and told 
them to come and fetch his boy. Then he sat down in front of the 
TV with his gun across his knees. When Mrs Burroughs from next 

The club was a good place to go and smoke cigarettes. 

door came to ask if Teddy was OK - she had heard the screaming-
Teddy's dad pointed the gun at her. Mrs Burroughs left the 
Duchamp house at roughly the speed of light and called the police. 

When the ambulance came for Teddy, his dad explained to the 
ambulancemen that although the captain said the area was clear, he 
knew there were still German soldiers around. Before long, Teddy's 
dad was in Togus, which was a special hospital where they sent 
soldiers who were mad from the war. He had been on the beaches 
in Normandy and had just got worse and worse ever since. In spite 
of what his dad had done to him, Teddy was proud of him and 
visited him in Togus every week. 

Teddy was the stupidest boy in our gang, I suppose, and he was 
crazy. He used to take the craziest chances, like running out in front 
of lorries on the road and jumping out of the way at the very last 
moment. This made him laugh, but it frightened us because his 
eyesight was so bad. You had to be careful what you dared him 
because he liked to do anything for a dare. 

In the middle of a game of cards we heard someone coming fast 
up the ladder which was fixed to the side of the tree. It was Vern 
Tessio, one of the other regulars. He was sweating hard. 

'Wait till you hear this, guys,' he said. 
'Hear what?' I asked. 
'I've got to get my breath. I ran all the way from my house.' 
'All the way?' Chris asked unbelievingly. 'Man, you're crazy.' 
Vern's house was two miles away. 'It's too hot for that.' 

'This is worth it,' Vern said. 'You won't believe this.' 
'What?' 
'Can you all camp out tonight?' Vern was looking at us in 
excitement. His eyes were dark and hard in his sweaty face. 'I mean, 
if you tell your families we're going to camp in my back field?' 

'Yeah, I think so,' Chris said, picking up his cards and looking 
at them. 'But my dad's in an awful mood. Drinking . . . you 
know.' 

'You've got to, man,' Vern said. 'Sincerely. You won't believe this. 
Can you, Gordie?' 

'Probably.' 
I usually could do things like that; in fact, I had hardly been at 
home all summer. In April my older brother, Dennis, had died in a 
Jeep* accident. He had just started training in the army. An army 
lorry hit the jeep he was in and he died immediately. He was a few 
days short of being twenty. My parents. . . 

'So what's this all about, Vern?' Teddy asked. He and Chris were 
still playing cards; I was reaching for a detective magazine. 

Vern Tessio said: 'You guys want to go and see a dead body?' 
Everybody stopped. 

Chapter 3 The Forests of Maine 

We'd all heard about it on the radio, of course. We had our old 
radio on all the time, listening to pop music — Elvis Presley, Roy 
Orbison and the rest. When the news came on we usually stopped 
listening, but the Ray Brower story was different: he was our 
age and from Chamberlain, a town about forty miles away from 
Castle Rock. 

Three days before Vern burst into the clubhouse, Ray Brower 
had gone out with one of his mother's buckets to pick wild fruit. 
When night fell and he still hadn't returned, his mother called the 
police and the search started. But three days later no one had found 
him. We knew, from listening to the story on the radio, that they 
were never going to find him alive. Sooner or later they would just 
stop searching. They were already sending divers down into the 
pools and lakes. 

Nothing like that could happen in south-west Maine today. 

* Jeep: an army vehicle which is especially good at travelling off the roads. 

Suburbs have spread over most of the land. The forest is still 
there in places, but if you walk steadily in a single direction 
you'll find a road sooner or later. But in those days it was 
possible to walk into the forest and lose your direction there and 
die. 

Chapter 4 A Jar of Pennies 

Vern Tessio had been under the front of his house digging. Before I 
go any further I'd better tell you why he was digging there. And 
even before I tell you that, I'd better tell you that Vern and Teddy 
were about equal in intelligence - in not having very much intelli-
gence, that is. Vern's brother Billy was even more stupid, as you'll 
see. 

Four years ago, when he was eight, Vern buried a jar of 
pennies under the front of the house, in the dark space he called 
his cave. He was playing a game about robbers, and they were 
hiding the pennies from the police. He drew a map which 
showed where the jar was, put it in his room and forgot about it 
for nearly a month. Then, one day when he wanted to go and 
see a film and he didn't have enough money, he remembered 
about the pennies and went to find the map. But his mother 
had tidied his room and taken away the map, along with old 
magazines and other rubbish. She had used them to start a fire in 
the kitchen the next morning, so Vern's map went up the kitchen 
chimney. 

Ever since then Vern had looked for the jar of pennies. They 
added up to only about three dollars, but as the years passed, and 
Vern became more and more desperate about these pennies of his, 
the jar held sometimes as much as ten dollars. He never found the 
place where he had buried them. 

Sometimes we tried to tell him what was obvious to us — that 

his big brother Billy had known about the jar and had dug it up 
himself. But Vern refused to believe this, although he hated Billy. 
He also refused to ask Billy about it. Probably he was afraid that 
Billy would laugh and say, 'Of course I took them, you stupid pussy, 
and there were twenty dollars in the jar and I spent it all.' 

Anyway, he was digging there early that Friday morning when 
he heard the screen door open and shut above him. He kept very 
quiet. He heard Billy's friend Charlie Hogan say, 'Jesus Christ, 
Billy, what are we going to do?' 

Now, Charlie was one of the hardest guys in town. He was in the 
same gang as Ace Merrill and Eyeball Chambers, so he had to be 
hard. So as soon as Vern heard him talk like that, he was very 
interested. Something big was happening. 

'Nothing,' Billy said. 'That's what we're going to do. Nothing.' 
'But didn't you see him?' Charlie said. 'It must be that boy in the 
news on the radio, the one called Brower or something. Christ, 
Billy, the train must have hit him.' 

'Yeah, right,' Billy agreed. 'And you puked. It was lucky the girls 
didn't see him. They would tell everyone. Do you think they 
guessed something was wrong?' 

'No,' said Charlie. 'Marie doesn't like to go down that Back 
Harlow Road, anyway. She thinks it's frightening out there. But it's 
a pity we stole that car, Billy. Now we can't tell the police, because 
they would ask us how we got to Harlow district without a car of 
our own. And I puked on my new shoes. The guy was just lying 
there — did you see him, man?' 

They finished their cigarettes and went off to find Ace. 
'Are we going to tell Ace, Billy?' Charlie asked as they walked 
away. 

'Man, we aren't ever going to tell anyone,'' said Billy. 
As soon as Vern was sure that they were really gone, he ran all the 
way to our tree house with the news. 

Chapter 5 
Making Plans 

'You're really lucky,' I said. 'They'd kill you if they knew you had 
listened' 

Teddy said, 'I know the Back Harlow Road. It ends at the river. I 
used to go fishing there.' 

'Could he have walked all the way from Chamberlain to 
Harlow?' I asked. 'That's twenty or thirty miles.' 

'I think so,' Chris said, 'if he was following the railway tracks. It's 
easy to walk on them, and he probably thought they would lead 
him out of the forest. And then in the dark along comes a train 
and. . . bang.' 

'Anyway, do you want to go and see. it?' Vern asked. He was so 
excited that he could hardly keep still. 

'Yes,' said Chris, throwing his cards on to the table. 'And you 
know what? I bet we get our pictures in the paper. We'll be 
famous.' 

'What?' said Vern. Teddy grinned. 
'Yeah,' Chris explained. 'We can find the body and report it.' 
'I don't know,' said Vern. 'Billy would guess that I heard him 
and Charlie talking, and he'll beat me.' 

'No, he won't,' I said. 'He won't have to worry any more about 
the stolen car and everything.' 

'But what about our parents?' Teddy said. 'If we find the body, 
they'll know we weren't camping in Vern's back field.' 

'We'll just tell them we got bored in the field,' I said, 'and 
decided to camp in the forest instead. And then everyone will be 
too excited about us finding the body to beat us.' 

'OK,' Teddy said. 'Let's all meet here after lunch. What can we 
tell them about supper?' 

Chris said, 'You and me and Gordie can say we're eating at 
Vern's.' 

'And I'll tell my mother I'm eating over at Chris's,' Vern said. 

That would work unless there was some emergency or unless any 
of the parents contacted each other. None of us came from rich 
families, and neither Vern's nor Chris's house had a telephone. A lot 
of people didn't in those days. 

My dad had retired from work, Vern's dad worked at a factory in 
town. Teddy's mum hired out a room in her house when she could 
find someone to take it. Chris's dad was nearly always drunk and 
didn't have a job. 

Chris didn't talk about his dad much, but we all knew he hated 
him like poison. His dad beat him often. Once, the year before, 
some milk-money had disappeared from school. Chris was accused 
of taking it. He swore he didn't steal it, but because he was one of 
those no-good Chambers he wasn't allowed back in school for two 
weeks. His father put him in the hospital that time, with a broken 
nose and wrist. It's true that he came from a bad family: his eldest 
brother Dave was in prison, and Richard (called Eyeball because he 
had a bad eye) went round with Ace Merrill and the other local 
hard men. 

'I think that'll work,' I said. 'What about John and Marty?' John 
and Marty DeSpain were two other regular members of our 
gang. 

'They're still away,' Chris said. 'They won't be back till 
Monday.' 

We were too excited now to play cards. We all left the clubhouse 
and went home to get ready. 

Chapter 6 
Brother Denny 

When I got home, my mum was out. My dad was in the garden, 
hopelessly watering the dry plants. 

'Hi, Dad,' I said brightly. 'Will it be all right if I camp out in Vern 
Tessio's back field tonight with some of the guys?' 

'What guys?' 
'Vern, Teddy Duchamp, Chris.' ' 
Sometimes he took the opportunity to complain about the 
friends I chose, but today he didn't care. 'I suppose it's OK,' he 
said. 

There was no argument in him that morning; he just looked 
sad and tired. He was sixty-three, old enough to be my grandfather. 
My mother was fifty-five. When she and Dad got married they 
tried to start a family straight away, but with no luck. A few years 
later a doctor told them they would never have a baby. But five 
years after that, Dennis was born. 

The doctor said it was amazing, and that my parents should thank 
God and be happy with Denny because he would be the only child. 
Seven years later, I was born. 

For my parents, one gift from God was enough. I won't 
say they were cruel to me or anything like that, but I 
certainly came as a surprise, and I guess when you're in your 
forties you don't enjoy surprises as much as you used to. They 
just acted as if I didn't exist most of the time. I was the invisible 
man, like in the book. At the supper table it was 'Denny, how 
did you do today at school?' and 'Denny, who are you taking to 
the dance?' and 'Denny, we'd better talk man to man about that 
car we saw'. If I said, 'Pass the butter,' Dad would say, 'Denny, 
are you sure the army is what you want?' If I repeated my 
request for the butter, Mum would say, 'Denny, do you want 
me to buy you one of those Pendleton shirts tomorrow?' One 
night when I was nine, I said, 'Jesus, these potatoes taste like 
garbage.' I wanted to see what would happen. And Mum said, 
'Denny, Auntie Grace called today and asked about you and 
Gordon.' 

I didn't hate Denny or think he was the greatest person in the 
world either. We rarely did things together. He was seven years 
older than me, and lived in a different world. So how could I have 

strong feelings about him? It was great when he took me to the 
park to watch him play ball with his friends, or when he read a 
story-book to me, but there weren't many times like that. Most 
of the time I was alone. I guess that's why I started reading a lot, 
and why I'm a writer now. Like all writers I sometimes try to 
put the places and people I knew when I was young into my 
stories. 

After his death, my parents just went to pieces. Now it was five 
months, and I didn't know if they would ever be whole again. 
They left Denny's room exactly the same; they didn't touch a 
thing. That room frightened me. I expected dead Denny to be 
there, waiting for me in the clothes cupboard, with his brains 
spilling out of his head from the accident. I imagined his arms 
coming up, and him whispering: Why wasn't it you, Gordie? Why 
wasn't it you who died? 

Chapter 7 
The Gun 

My room was on the second floor, and it was really hot up 
there. I was glad I wasn't sleeping there that night, and the 
thought of where we were going made me excited again. I 
rolled up two blankets and tied an old belt around them. I 
collected all my money, which was less than a dollar. Then I was 
ready to go. 

I went down the back stairs to avoid meeting my dad. I was 
walking up Carbine Street towards the clubhouse when Chris 
caught up with me. His eyes were shining. 

'Gordie! You want to see something?' 
'Sure. What?' 
'Come down here first.' He pointed down an alley between two 
shops. 

'What is it, Chris?' 

'Come on, I said!' 
He ran down the alley and I ran after him. At the bottom, the 
smell from the rubbish was terrible. 'Chris, sincerely, I'm going to 
puke, I'm -' 

But I forgot about the smell when Chris put his hand into his 
backpack and pulled out an enormous handgun. 

'Do you want to be the Lone Ranger or the Cisco Kid?' Chris 
asked with a grin, naming our two favourite TV heroes. 

'Jesus, Chris, where did you get that?' 
'From my dad's desk.' 
'Man, your dad's going to beat you when he finds out.' 
Chris's eyes just went on dancing. 'He isn't going to find out. He 
and his friends have got enough wine to keep them drunk for a 
week. I'll put it back before then.' Chris hated alcohol - he'd already 
seen too much of what it can do. He was the only one in our gang 
who didn't have a drink when the DeSpain twins brought some 
beer they'd stolen from their father. 

'Have you got bullets for it?' 
'Nine of them — all that was left in the box. He'll think he used 
them himself, shooting at bottles when he was drunk.' 

'Any in it at the moment?' 
'No, of course not. What do you think I am?' 
I finally took the gun. I liked the heavy way it sat in my hand. I 
could see myself as someone out of an Ed McBain story or a John D. 
MacDonald novel. I pointed the gun at a large tin with smelly 
rubbish spilling out of it and squeezed. 

KA - BLAM! 

The gun jumped in my hand. Fire shot from the end. It felt as 
if my wrist was broken. My heart was in my mouth. A big hole 
appeared in the surface of the tin — it was the work of an evil 
magician. 

Jesus!' I screamed. 

I finally took the gun. I liked the heavy way it sat in my hand. 

Chris was laughing wildly; I couldn't tell if he was amused or 
frightened. 'You did it, you did it! Gordie Lachance is shooting 
Castle Rock to pieces. Be careful, everyone! Here comes 
Gordie!' 

'Shut up! Let's go!' I screamed, and grabbed him by the shirt. 
I gave the gun to Chris and he pushed it into his backpack as we 
ran up the alley. When we reached Carbine Street we slowed to a 
walk, so that no one would notice us if they had heard the noise of 
the gun. Chris was still laughing. 

'Man, it's a pity you couldn't see your face. Oh, man, that was 
really great.' 

'You knew there was a bullet in it, didn't you? That was a rotten 
trick, Chris, really.' 

'I didn't know, Gordie, honestly. I just took it out of my dad's 
desk. He always takes the bullets out of it. I suppose he was too 
drunk to remember last time.' 

Chris looked as innocent as a baby, but when we got to the 
clubhouse we found Vern and Teddy waiting, and he started to 
laugh again. He told them the whole story, and after everyone had 
had a good laugh Teddy asked Chris what he thought they needed a 
gun for. 

'Nothing, really,' Chris said. 'Except we might see a wild animal. 
Besides, it's frightening out in the forest at night.' 

Everyone nodded at that. Chris was the strongest and bravest guy 
in our gang, and he could say things like that. If Teddy had said it, 
we'd all have laughed at him. 

'Did you put your tent up in the field?' Teddy asked Vern. 
'Yeah, and I put two lamps in it and turned them on, so it'll look as 
if we're there after dark.' 

'Hey, man, great!' I said, and slapped Vern on the back. For him, 
that was real thinking. He grinned. 

'So let's go,' Teddy said. 'It's nearly twelve already.' 
Chris stood up and we gathered round him. 

'We'll walk across Beeman's field,' he said, 'and then we'll meet 
the railway tracks by the dump and just walk across the bridge into 
Harlow.' 

'How far is it, do you think?' Teddy asked. 
'I don't know,' said Chris. 'Harlow's big. We're going to have 
to walk at least twenty miles. Does that sound right to you, 
Gordie?' 

'Yeah. Maybe more — thirty miles.' 
'Even if it's thirty we should be there by tomorrow afternoon, if 
no one turns into a pussy,' said Chris. 

'No pussies here,' Teddy said straight away. 
'Miaoww,' Vern said, and we all laughed. 
'Come on, you guys,' Chris said, and picked up his backpack, 
blankets and water bottle. 

Chapter 8 The Railway 

By the time we got across Beeman's field and had reached the 
tracks, we had all taken our shirts off and tied them around our 
waists. We were sweating like pigs. We climbed the bank up to the 
railway, and there we stood and looked down the tracks. 

I'll never forget that moment, however old I get. The hands on 
my watch stood at twelve o'clock and the sun shone down with 
cruel heat. Behind us was Castle Rock, where we had all grown up, 
with its houses and its factories sending smoke into the sky and 
waste into the river. In front of us were the railway tracks, and the 
sun seemed to send us messages off the metal. The Castle River was 
to our left, and to our right some empty land, covered in small 
bushes. 

We stood there for that one midday moment, and then Chris 
said, 'Come on, let's go.' 

We walked beside the tracks and our feet sent up clouds of black 

dust at every step. Vern started singing, but soon stopped, which was 
better for our ears. Only Teddy and Chris had brought water bottles 
and we were all drinking from them a lot. 

'We can fill the bottles again at the dump,' I said. 'There's a tap 
there with good water, my dad told me.' 

'OK,' Chris said. 'That will be a good place to rest, anyway.' 
'What about food?' Teddy asked suddenly. 'I bet nobody 
remembered to bring something to eat. I know I didn't.' 

Chris stopped. 'God! I didn't either. Gordie?' 
I shook my head, feeling really stupid. 
'Vern?' 
'Nothing,' Vern said. 'Sorry.' 
'Let's see how much money we've got,' I said. I untied my shirt 
and laid it on the ground. We all put our money into it. We had 
about two and a half dollars. 

'Not bad,' I said. 'There's a shop at the end of that little road that 
goes to the dump. One of us can get some hamburger meat and 
some Cokes there.' 

'Who?' Vern asked. 
'We'll, spin coins for it when we get to the dump. Come on.' 
I put all the money into my pocket and was just tying my shirt 
around my waist again when Chris shouted, 'Train!' 

I put my hand on to one of the tracks to feel it, although I could 
already hear it. The track was shaking like a living thing. Vern and 
Chris jumped down the bank. The train was really loud now. 
Instead of jumping, Teddy turned towards the train. The sun flashed 
off his thick glasses. 

'Come on, Teddy,' I said. 
'No, I'm going to wait till it's close and then jump.' He looked at 
me in excitement. 'Lorries are nothing, man. This is a train.' 

'You're crazy, man. Do you want to get killed?' 
'Just like on the beaches at Normandy!' Teddy shouted, and 
walked out into the middle of the tracks. 

For a moment I was too surprised to move, unable to believe 
such amazing stupidity. Then I grabbed him, pulled him to the 
top of the bank and pushed him over the edge. I jumped after 
him and he hit me in the stomach as I landed. I got a knee into 
his chest at the same time and he fell down. Then we were 
locked together, rolling over and over, hitting and scratching each 
other. 

'You little worm!' Teddy was screaming. 'Don't you act big with 
me! I'll kill you!' 

'Teddy!' I shouted back. 'No one must know we're here. Don't 
you understand, you stupid pussy?' 

Eventually Chris and Vern separated us. Chris held Teddy until 
he became calm and just stood there, his glasses bent and hanging 
off one ear. 

'You're a pussy, Lachance,' Teddy said. 
'He was just trying to do the right thing, man,' Chris said 
'Come on, you guys,' Vern said. 'Let's go.' 

Chapter 9 
The Dump 

We reached the dump around half past one and slid down the 
bank. The dump was surrounded by a high wire fence, and there 
were signs saying that the dump was open between four and eight 
in the afternoon — no entry at any other time under any circum-
stances. We climbed over the fence and jumped down to the 
ground. 

We went straight to the tap. While Vern and Teddy argued 
about who would go next, I looked round. There was always so 
much stuff in the dump that my eyes hurt just looking at it. All of 
America was there — all the stuff for which America had no further 
use. There were plenty of wild animals too, but not the kinds you 
see in Disney films or in children's zoos where they let you stroke 

the animals. The town dogs came here too. They used to attack 
each other over a piece of rotten meat, but they never attacked Milo 
Pressman, the manager of the dump, because Milo always had 
Chopper with him. 

Chopper was the most feared and the least seen dog in Castle 
Rock. Rumours and stories had made him enormous, cruel and 
ugly. It was said that Milo had trained him to go for particular parts 
of the body. He could take an ear, an eye, a foot, a leg or. . . any part 
of the body. Even Teddy was afraid of Chopper. 

There was no sign of Milo or Chopper today. 
Chris and I watched Vern and Teddy at the tap. 'Teddy's crazy,' I 
said softly. 

'I know it,' Chris said. 'He won't live to be twice the age he is 
now.' 

'You remember that time in the tree?' 
'Of course.' 
The year before, Teddy and Chris had climbed a tall tree 
behind my house. Chris had stopped near the top because the 
rest of the branches looked dry and rotten. Teddy wanted to go 
on, and nothing Chris said made any difference. Teddy did it, 
though - he reached the top. But then the branch he was on 
broke and Teddy fell. Chris just managed to grab hold of 
Teddy's hair as he went past. Although his wrist hurt for a 
week afterwards, he held him until his feet found a branch to stand 
on. When they got down Chris was grey-faced and almost 
puking from fear. And Teddy was angry with him for pulling 
his hair! 

'I dream about it sometimes,' Chris said. 'Except in the dream 
I miss him. I just grab a couple of hairs and Teddy goes screaming 
down through the branches to the ground. Strange, eh?' 

'Right,' I said, and for a moment we looked in each other's eyes 
and saw some of the true things that made us friends. 

After we had all had enough to drink and had thrown water at 

one another for a while, we sat in the shadow of the dump's only-
tree. 

'This is really a good time,' Vern said simply. He didn't mean just 
being here in the dump or going for a walk up the tracks. All that 
was only part of it. Everything was there and around us. We knew 
exactly who we were and exactly where we were going in life. It 
was great. 

We sat under the tree until the shadows grew longer, and then we 
realized someone had to go and get some food. 

'The dump opens at four,' Vern said. 'I don't want to be here 
when Milo and Chopper arrive.' 

'OK,' I said. 'Odd man goes?' 
'That's you, Gordie,' Chris said. 'You're odd all right.' 
I grinned and gave them each a coin. 'Spin,' I said. 
Four coins shone brightly as they turned in the sun. Four hands 
grabbed them from the air. Four flat slaps on four dirty wrists. We 
uncovered. Two heads and two tails. We spun again and this time all 
four of us had tails. 

'Oh, Jesus, that's bad luck,' Vern said, not telling us anything we 
didn't know. Four heads meant really good luck, four tails the 
opposite. 

'Nobody believes that garbage,' Teddy said. 'It's baby stuff. Come 
on, spin.' 

This time the other three all had tails and I had heads. And I was 
suddenly frightened. They still had the bad luck. Then Teddy was 
laughing his crazy laugh and pointing at me, and the feeling 
disappeared. 

'Go and get the food,' Teddy cried. 
'Go on, Gordie,' said Chris. 'We'll wait by the tracks.' 
'You guys had better not go on without me,' I said. And away I 
went. 

I never had any friends later like the ones I had when I was 
twelve. Did you? 

Chapter 10 Milo and Chopper 

Words mean different things to different people. To me summer 
is always going to mean running down the road to the Florida 
Market with coins jumping in my pocket and the sun flying my 
brains. The word brings a picture to my mind of railway tracks 
running off into the distance. There were also favourite songs 
and films, games to play, grass to cut, sports to play and teams to 
support. 

And now I sit here trying to look through an IBM screen and 
see that time, and I can almost feel the thin, brown boy buried in 
this 34-year-old body, and I can almost hear the sounds I heard 
then. But all of that summer is contained in the picture of 
Gordon Lachance running down the road to the Florida Market 
with the coins in his pocket and the sweat running down his 
back. 

After I had bought the food I walked fast back to the dump. I put 
the bag of food inside my shirt and climbed over the gate. I was 
halfway through the dump, towards the back where I had left the 
others, when I saw something I didn't like: Milo Pressman's car was 
parked beside his office building. If Milo saw me, I was going to be 
in a world of pain. Suddenly the other side of the dump seemed 
very far away. Why hadn't I gone round the outside of the fence? 
But I was too far into the dump now to want to turn round and go 
back. 

I kept putting one foot in front of the other, trying to look calm, 
trying to look as if I belonged here, with a paper bag down the front 
of my shirt, walking towards the fence between the dump and the 
railway tracks. 

I was about fifty feet from the fence and just beginning to 
think that everything was going to be all right when I heard 
Milo shout, 'Hey, you! Get away from that fence! Get out of 
here!' 

I started running for the fence with a wild shout. Vern, Teddy 
and Chris appeared on the other side of the fence and stared 
through it. 

'You come back here!' Milo screamed. 'Come back here or I'll 
send my dog after you!' 

That only made me run even faster for the fence. Teddy started 
to laugh his crazy laugh — eee-eee-eee. 

'Go, Gordie! Go!' Vern shouted. 
And Milo screamed: 'Get him, Chopper! Go and get him!' 
I threw the bag over the fence and Vern caught it. Behind me, I 
could hear Chopper coming, shaking the earth, breathing fire and 
ice from his nose. I threw myself halfway up the fence with one 
jump, screaming. I reached the top in about three seconds and 
simply leapt off, without looking down to see what I might land 
on. What I almost landed on was Teddy, who was bent over with 
laughter. His glasses had fallen off and tears were streaming from 
his eyes. I turned round and got my first look at the famous 
Chopper. 

Instead of some enormous creature from hell with red eyes and 
cruel teeth, I was looking at an ordinary, black and white, middle-
sized dog. He was jumping up at the fence and trying to reach us. 
Teddy was walking up and down outside the fence, making 
Chopper even more angry. 

'Kiss my ass, Chopper!' Teddy invited, and turned round to hit 
the fence with his ass. Chopper went crazy and leapt at the fence to 
accept Teddy's invitation, but Teddy moved away and all Chopper 
got was a hurt nose. Chris and Vern were lying on the bank, 
laughing so hard they could scarcely move. 

And here came Milo Pressman. 'You boys stop being horrible to 
my dog! Stop it this second!' 

'Bite it, Chopper! Bite it! Come and get me!' Teddy continued 
from the other side of the fence. 

Chopper went mad. He ran around in a big circle three times — 

perhaps giving himself courage — and then threw himself with full 
force at the fence. He was doing maybe thirty miles an hour when 
he hit the fence. The fence seemed to stretch, and then Chopper fell 
back to the ground in a cloud of dust. He lay there for a moment 
before walking away with his tongue hanging out of one side of his 
mouth. 

Milo was now really angry. His face turned dark red. 
'I know you!' he shouted. 'You're Teddy Duchamp! I know all of 
you! I'll beat your ass for being cruel to my dog!' 

'I'd like to see you try!' Teddy shouted back. 'Let's see you climb 
over this fence and get me, fat-ass!' 

'WHAT? WHAT DID YOU CALL ME?' 
'FAT-ASS!' Teddy screamed happily. 'You and your stupid 
dog!' 

'You little madman's son! I'll talk to your mother!' 
'What did you call me?' It was Teddy's turn now. He had stopped 
jumping up and down and was looking at Milo strangely. 

Milo realized that he had found the right button and he pushed 
hard down on it. 'Your dad is crazy,' he said, grinning. 'Mad and 
up in Togus, that's what. Crazier than a rat in a pile of garbage. 
Crazy. It's not surprising you're behaving the way you are, with a 
madman for a father.' 

Teddy and Milo were nose to nose at the fence now. Vern and 
Chris had almost stopped laughing and begun to see the seriousness 
of the situation. 

'Don't you say anything else about my dad. My dad was on the 
beaches at Normandy, you fat pussy.' 

'Yes, but where is he now, you ugly little four-eyed lump of puke. 
Up in Togus, isn't he?' 

'OK, that's enough,' said Teddy. 'Now I'm going to kill you.' 
He started to climb the fence. 

'Come on and try, you dirty little rat.' Milo stepped back and 
stood there, waiting and grinning. 

Teddy and Milo were nose to nose at the fence now. 

'No!' I shouted. I got to my feet, grabbed Teddy by his jeans and 
pulled him off the fence. 

'Let me go!' Teddy shouted. 'Let me get him!' 
'No, that's just what he wants,' I shouted in his ear. 'He wants to 
get you over there and beat you and take you to the police.' 

'What?' Teddy turned his head round to look at me. 
'You think you're so clever,' Milo said, approaching the fence 
again with his hands curled. 'Why don't you let him fight his own 
battles?' 

'Sure,' I said. 'A grown man against a boy!' 
'I know you' Milo said. 'Your name's Lachance. And those guys 
are Chris Chambers and one of those stupid Tessio boys. I'm going 
to talk to your fathers.' He stood and waited for us to cry and say 
we were sorry or something. 

Chris made an O with his thumb and finger and pushed his 
tongue through it. 

Vern looked up at the sky. 
Teddy said, 'Come on, Gordie. Let's go before this guy makes me 
puke.' 

'I'll get you, you dirty-mouthed little rat. Wait till I get you to 
the police.' 

'We heard what you said about his father,' I told him. 'We're all 
witnesses. And you sent your dog after me. That's against the law.' 
Milo looked uncertain. Before he could see how weak my 
argument was, I said, 'Come on, you guys. Let's go. Something 
smells bad around here.' 

'I can't wait to tell the police how you called a war hero a 
madman,' Chris called back over his shoulder as we left. 'What did 
you do in the war, Mr Pressman?' 

'That's none of your business,' Milo shouted back. 'You hurt my 
dog! Come back here!' But his voice was lower now and he seemed 
to be losing interest. 

I looked back when we reached the top of the bank. Milo was 

standing there behind the fence, a big man with a dog sitting 
beside him. His fingers were holding the fence and I suddenly 
felt sorry for him. He looked exactly like a schoolboy locked 
in the school playground by mistake, calling for someone to let 
him out. 

Chapter 11 
Night-Sweats 

'We showed old Milo that we're no pussies,' Vern said. 

'Right,' agreed Teddy 'You bet we did.' 
Although I enjoyed the victory too, I was worried. Perhaps 
Milo would go to the police. Perhaps those four tails on the 
coins were a sign of bad luck. What were we doing anyway, 
going to look at the broken body of some poor guy that a train 
had hit? 

But we were doing it, and none of us wanted to stop. 
We had almost reached the bridge which carried the tracks 
across the river when Teddy suddenly burst into tears. He fell to 
the ground, shaking with the violence of the storm that had come 
on him. None of us knew what to do. This wasn't the kind of 
crying we were used to, when you fell off your bike or 
something. 

'Hey, man . . .' Vern said in a very thin voice. Chris and I looked 
at Vern hopefully. 'Hey, man' was always a good start. But Vern 
couldn't go on. 

At last, when the force of his crying had lessened a bit, it was 
Chris who went to him. Chris was the hardest guy in our gang, but 
he was also the guy who made the best peace. He was good at it. 
I've seen him sit down on the pavement next to a small boy he 
didn't even know, who had hurt his knee, and get him talking about 
something until the boy forgot his pain. 

'Listen, Teddy, does it matter what a fat old bag of puke like him 

said about your father? It doesn't change anything, does it? 
Does it?' 

Teddy shook his head. No, it didn't change anything. But this 
was something he had thought about on those long, lonely 
nights when he couldn't sleep, and hearing it spoken aloud in 
the daytime . . . realizing in the clear light of day that everyone 
else in the world considers your father a madman . . . that had 
shaken him. 

'He still fought on the beaches at Normandy, didn't he?' 
Chris went on. He took one of Teddy's hands. Teddy nodded 
fiercely. 

'Do you think that pile of garbage was at Normandy?' 
Teddy shook his head violently. 'No!' 
'Do you think that guy knows your father?' 
'No.' 
'Talk is cheap.' 
Teddy nodded but still didn't look up. 
'And whatever there is between you and your father, talk 
can't change that. He was just trying to get you to climb back 
over the fence, man. He doesn't know anything about your 
father. He's only heard stuff from people he drinks with, that's 
all'. 

Teddy had nearly stopped crying now. He wiped his eyes and sat 
up. 'I'm OK,' he said, and the sound of his own voice seemed to 
persuade him he was right. 'Yes, I'm OK.' He stood up and put his 
glasses back on. He laughed thinly and wiped his bare arm across his 
nose. 'I'm a cry-baby, right?' 

'No, man,' Vern said uncomfortably. 'If anyone said those kinds 
of things about my father —' 

'Then you have to kill them,' Teddy said. 'Right, Chris?' 
'Right,' said Chris, and slapped Teddy on the back. 
'Right, Gordie?' 
'Yeah, right,' I said wondering how Teddy could care so much 

for his dad, who had almost killed him, and how I didn't either love 
or hate my father, who had never even beaten me, as far as I could 
remember. 

We walked on down the tracks for another two hundred yards 
and then Teddy said in a quieter voice, 'If I spoiled your good time, 
I'm sorry.' 

'I'm not sure I want it to be a good time,' Vern said suddenly. 
Chris looked at him. 'Are you saying you want to go back?' 
'No.' Vern's face showed that he was trying to work out how to 
say what he was thinking. 'But we're going to see a dead guy. That 
shouldn't be like going to a party. I mean, I could even get a little 
frightened, if you know what I mean.' 

Nobody said anything and Vern went on. 
'I mean, sometimes I'm in bed at night, and maybe I've been 
reading a frightening magazine or something, and I start wondering 
whether there's anything under my bed, you know? Something 
with a green face and blood on its hands, which might reach up and 
grab me . . .' 

We all began to nod. We all knew about the night-sweats. I 
certainly didn't imagine then that in about a dozen years I'd turn a 
simple example of the night-sweats into about a million dollars. 

'So you see, if this body we're going to see is really bad, maybe 
I'll start dreaming and imagining him under my bed. But I feel as if 
we still have to see him . . . but maybe it shouldn't be a good time.' 

'Right,' Chris said softly. 'Maybe it shouldn't.' 
'You won't tell anyone else what I said, will you?' Vern said. 'The 
other guys wouldn't understand.' 

We all said we wouldn't. We walked on in thoughtful silence. It 
wasn't yet three o'clock, but it seemed much later. We hadn't even 
reached Harlow yet. We were going to have to move faster. Around 
half past three we arrived at the Castle River and the bridge which 
crossed it. 

Chapter 12 
The Bridge 

The bridge was made of wood and had spaces all the way across, 
through which you could look straight down into the river. 
There was a narrow walkway on either side of the tracks — wide 
enough so that you wouldn't actually get hit by any train, but 
so narrow that the wind of a passing train would blow you off 
the bridge. And it was a long way down to the river, and the 
river was shallow and fast. In fact, this bridge wasn't for walking 
across. 

Looking at the bridge, we all felt fear start to move in our 
stomachs, but mixing with the fear was the excitement of a really 
big dare, something you could be proud to tell your friends about 
after you got home . . . if you got home. Teddy's eyes were shining: 
this was better than lorries. 

'Man,' Chris said softly. 
'Come on,' Teddy said. 'Let's go.' He was already at the start of 
the bridge, where the wooden supports were built out over the 
land. 

'Does anybody know when the next train's due?' Vern asked 
uneasily.' 

Nobody knew. 
I said, 'There's the Route 136 bridge . . . ' 
'No, man!' Teddy cried. 'That means walking five miles down 
the river on this side and then five miles back on the other side. It'll 
take hours. We can cross the bridge and get to the same place in ten 
minutes.' 

'But if a train comes, there's nowhere to go,' Vern said. He wasn't 
looking at Teddy; he was looking down at the river. 

'Of course there is,' Teddy said. He climbed over the edge of 
the bridge and held on to one of the wooden supports between 
the tracks. He was still hanging over the land, but the thought 
of doing that in the middle of the bridge, with the river fifty 

feet below and a train thundering by overhead, made me feel 

sick. 

'See how easy it is?' Teddy said. He dropped to the ground, 
wiped his hands and climbed back up beside us. 

'What if it's a 200-car train?' Chris asked. 'Are you going to hang 
there for five or ten minutes?' 

'Are you afraid?' Teddy asked. 'You can go the long way round if 
you want to, but I'm going across the bridge. I'll wait for you on the 
other side!' 

'There are probably only one or two trains a day here,' I said, 'and 
one has passed us already. Look at all the grass growing in the 
middle of the tracks.' 

'See?' Teddy was delighted at his victory. 
'There's still a chance of a train,' I added. 
'Yes,' Chris said. He was looking only at me, his eyes shining. 'I 
dare you, Lachance.' 

'Darers go first.' 
'All right,' Chris said. He looked at the others as well. 'Any 
pussies here?' 

'NO!' Teddy shouted. 
Vern cleared his throat and said 'no' in a small voice. He smiled a 
weak, sickly smile. 

'OK,' Chris said . . . but we hesitated for a moment and looked 
up and down the tracks. I knelt down and touched the steel. 
Nothing. 

'OK,' I said. 
We went out on to the bridge one by one: Chris first, then 
Teddy, then Vern, and me last because I was the one who said that 
darers go first. 

You had to walk looking down, to make sure you put your 
feet down on wood rather than thin air. When I saw river instead 
of rocks below me, I stopped to look up. Chris and Teddy were a 
long way in front, almost halfway across the bridge. Vern was 

between them and me. I had to go on. If I turned back, I'd be a 
pussy for life. 

When I was nearly halfway across I stopped again and looked up. 
I had almost caught up with Vern, who was being very cautious. 
Chris and Teddy had nearly reached the other side. And although 
I've written seven books about people who can do strange things 
like read other people's minds and see into the future, that was 
when I had my first and last experience of it myself. I bent down 
and touched the track. It was shaking hard, although it hadn't made 
a sound. 

I have never been as frightened as I was at that moment, 
holding that live track. My whole body just stopped working. 
My legs felt like water. My mouth opened — I didn't open it, it 
opened by itself. I couldn't move, but I could hear and see and 
sense everything inside me and for miles around me. I thought 
of Ray Brower, and I thought that Vern and I would soon be 
joining him. 

That thought unlocked my body. I jumped to my feet. At least, I 
suppose I jumped; to me it felt as if I was moving slowly up through 
five hundred feet of water. 

I screamed, 'TRAIN!' and began to run. 
Vern looked back over his shoulder. He saw my attempt at 
running and knew straight away that I wasn't joking. He began to 
run himself. 

Far in front I could see Chris stepping off the bridge and on 
to solid ground. He was safe. I was glad for him, but I was also 
jealous as hell. I watched him drop to his knees and touch a 
track. 

My left foot almost slipped, but I recovered and ran on. Now I 
was just behind Vern. We were more than halfway across, and for 
the first time I heard the train. It was coming from behind us, from 
the Castle Rock side of the river. 

'Ooooooh,Jesus!' Vern screamed. 

'Run, you pussy!' I shouted, and hit him on his back with 
my hand. 

'I can't! I'll fall!' 

'Run faster!' 
'Gordie! I can't!' 
'YOU 
CAN! 
RUN 
FASTER, 
PUKE-FACE!' 
I 
shouted at the top of my voice . . . and was I enjoying 
this? 

The train was very loud now. I kept expecting the bridge to start 
shaking under my feet. When that happened the train would be 
right behind us. 

'GO 
FASTER, 
VERN! 
FAAASTER!' 
'Oh God Gordie oh Gordie God ooooooh, heeeell!' 
The noise of the train filled the air now. There was no other 
sound in the world. It tore the air and it was the sound of 
death. I could see Chris below us and to the right, and 
Teddy behind him. They were both mouthing a single 
word and the word was jump!, but the train had taken all the 
blood out of the word, leaving only its shape in their mouths. 
The bridge began to shake as the train charged across it. We 
jumped. 

Vern landed in the dust and the stones, and I landed beside him, 
almost on top of him. I never saw the train and I don't know if the 
engineer saw us. I clapped my hands over my ears and dug my face 
into the hot dirt as the train went by, metal screaming against metal, 
the air blowing over us. I had no wish to look at it. Before it had 
passed completely I felt a warm hand on my neck and I knew it was 
Chris's-

When it was gone — when I was sure it was gone — I lifted my 
head. Vern was still lying face down in the dirt. Chris was sitting 
between us, one hand on Vern's sweaty neck, the other still on 
mine. 

When Vern finally sat up, shaking all over and wetting his lips. 

The noise of the train filled the air now. 
There was no other sound in the world. 

Chris said, 'Maybe we should have those Cokes? What do you guys 
think? Could anybody use one besides me?' 
We all thought we could use one. 

Chapter 13 
The Loser's Life 

About a quarter of a mile further on, the tracks ran into the forest 
and the land ran down to a bog. The air was full of biting insects 
which were about the size of aeroplanes, but it was cool . . . 
wonderfully cool. 

We sat in the shadows of the trees to drink our Cokes. We hadn't 
been there five minutes when Vern had to go off into the bushes, 
which caused a lot of joking when he came back. 

'Train frighten you much, Vern?' 
'No, man. I was going to go when we got across, anyway. I had to, 
you know.' 

'Are you sure, Vern?' 
'Come on, you guys. I did. Sincerely.' 
Chris turned to me. 'What about you, Gordie? Were you 
frightened?' 

'No way,' I said, and had a drink of my Coke. 
'Sincerely?' 
'Sincerely, man. I wasn't frightened at all.' 
'No? You weren't frightened?' Teddy was looking at me 
carefully. 

'No. I was a long way past fright - I was into terror.' 
They laughed for a long time at that. Then we lay back, not 
joking any more,just drinking our Cokes and being quiet. My body 
felt warm and peaceful. I was alive and glad to be. I felt affectionate 
towards everyone and everything around me. It was a very special 
feeling. 

After a while Chris stood up. 'Let's do some walking,' he said. It 

was still bright daylight and the sky was a hot, steely blue, but our 
shadows were beginning to grow longer. I remember that, when I 
was young, September days always seemed to end much too soon 
and catch me by surprise. It was as if something inside my heart 
expected it always to be June, with daylight hanging softly in the 
sky until almost half past nine. 'What time is it, Gordie?' Chris 
asked. 

I looked at my watch and said, 'After five.' 
'Yeah, let's go,' Teddy said. 'But let's make camp before dark 
so that we can see to get wood and stuff. I'm getting hungry, 
too.' 

'We'll stop at half past six,' Chris promised. 'OK with you 
guys?' 

It was. We started to walk again, along the stones beside the 
tracks. Soon the river was so far behind us that we couldn't even 
hear its sound. We were slapping insects off our backs and necks. 
Vern and Teddy were up in front, deep in conversation about TV 
shows. Chris was next to me, hands in his pockets, shirt slapping 
against his knees. 

'I've got some Winstons,' he said. 'One each, for after supper.' 
'Yeah? That's great.' 
'That's when a cigarette tastes best,' Chris said. 'After supper.' 
'Right.' 
'We walked in silence for a while, and then he asked, 'Are you 
ready for school?' 

'I guess so.' But who ever was ready? You got a little excited 
about going back and seeing your friends; you were curious about 
your new teachers and what they would be like. In a strange way 
you could even get excited about the long, boring lessons, because 
by the time the summer holidays were nearly over you sometimes 
got bored enough to believe you could learn something at school. 
But summer boredom was nothing like the school boredom that 
always started by the end of the second week, and by the beginning 

of the third week you were busy with the really important stuff: 
Could you hit Stinky Fiske in the back of the head with a paper 
bullet while the teacher was writing the capital cities of South 
America on the blackboard? Could you get a good loud noise off 
the surface of your desk if your hands were really sweaty? How 
many girls would let you feel their asses during lunch-hour? This is 
higher education, man. 

'You know what, Gordie?' Chris went on. 'By next June it'll be 
all over between us.' 

'What are you talking about? Why would that happen?' 
'Because me and Teddy and Vern will be doing different courses 
from you. You'll be on the college courses, we'll be on the shop 
courses, making bird houses and pots and stuff like that. You'll meet 
a lot of new guys ~ clever guys, like you. That's just the way it goes, 
Gordie.' 

'I'll meet a lot of pussies, you mean,' I said. 
He held my arm. 'No, man. Don't say that. Don't even think that. 
You know how you tell us stories sometimes? You've got a million 
stories inside you, and you can just sit there and tell one to us. Vern 
and Teddy may not always understand your stories. But those guys 
on the college courses will understand them.' 

'It doesn't matter about the stories. I'm not taking courses with a 
lot of pussies.' 

'If you don't, you're a fool.' 
'Why is it foolish to want to be with your friends?' 
He looked at me thoughtfully, as if deciding whether to tell me 
something. We had slowed down; Vern and Teddy were almost half 
a mile in front. The sun, which was lower now, came at us through 
the trees overhead in broken columns of light and turned every-
thing gold. 

'It's foolish if your friends can drag you down,' Chris said finally. 
'I know about you and your parents. They don't care about you. 
Your big brother was the one they cared about. It's like my dad. It 

was when Dave went to prison that he started hitting us and all. 
Your dad doesn't hit you, but maybe that's even worse. He's put 
you to sleep. If you told him you were joining the shop course, do 
you know what he'd do? He'd turn to the next page in his news-
paper and say, "That's nice, Gordon. Would you ask your mother 
what's for dinner?" And don't try to tell me I'm wrong. I've met 
him.' 

I didn't try to tell him he was wrong. It's a bit frightening to find 
out that someone else, even a friend, knows just how things are 
with you. 

'You're still young, Gordie —' 
'Thanks, Dad.' 
'I wish I was your dad,' he said angrily. 'If I was, you wouldn't 
talk about taking stupid shop courses. It's as if God gave you 
something—all those stories — and said, "Here you are. Try not to lose 
it." But children lose everything unless somebody is there to help 
them, and if your parents are too stupid to do it, maybe I ought to.' 

He looked like he was expecting me to try to hit him. His face 
was unhappy in the late afternoon light. He had broken the unwrit-
ten rule. You could say what you liked to a guy about himself, but 
never say a bad word about his parents. 

'If you stay with us just because you don't want to lose the gang,' 
Chris went on, 'you'll turn into just another guy with no good use 
for his brains, except to make clever, cruel remarks about other 
people. You'll never escape Castle Rock. You'll think it's important 
to have the right kind of car and then the right girl. And then you'll 
get married and work in the factory or some shoe shop for ever. Is 
that what you want?' 

Chris Chambers was twelve when he said all that to me, but 
something in his face as he spoke was older, ageless. It was as if he 
had lived that whole life already, and his words made me frightened. 
He understood the loser's life so well. He seemed to know what I 
was thinking. 

'I know what people think of my family in this town. Nobody 
even asked me if I took the milk-money that time.' 
'Did you take it?' I asked. I had never asked him before, and if you 
had told me I ever would I'd have called you crazy. The words came 
out like a dry bullet: 

'Yeah,' he said tiredly. 'Yeah, I took it.' He was silent for a 
moment. 'You knew I took it, Teddy knew, everybody knew. Even 
Vern knew, I think.' 

I started to deny it and then closed my mouth. He was 
right. I had argued with my parents that a person was innocent 
until proved guilty . . . but deep inside I had known the 
truth. 

'Then maybe I was sorry and tried to give it back,' Chris said. 
I stared at him. 'You tried to give it back?' 
'Maybe, I said. Just maybe. And maybe I took it to old Mrs Simons 
and told her, and gave her all the money; and maybe I wasn't 
allowed back at school for two weeks anyway, because the money 
still never appeared; and maybe the next week Mrs Simons had this 
new skirt on when she came to school.' 
I stared at Chris, speechless with horror. He smiled at me, but it 
was a tight, terrible smile which never touched his eyes. 

'Just maybe,' he said, but I remembered the new skirt. 
' Chris, how much was that money?' 
'Almost seven dollars.' 
'Christ,' I whispered. 
'But if I stole the money and then Mrs Simons stole it from 
me, and if I told anyone, what do you think would happen? Who 
would believe me? Me, Chris Chambers. Younger brother of Dave 
Chambers and Eyeball Chambers.' 

'No one would believe it,' I whispered. 'Jesus, Chris!' 
'I never thought that a teacher . . . Oh, hell. Who cares, anyway? 
Why am I even talking about it?' He wiped an arm angrily across 
his eyes and I realized he was almost crying. 

'Chris,' I said, 'why don't you go into the college courses? 
You're clever enough.' 

'The teachers decide all that in the school office. All they care 
about is whether you've behaved yourself in school and what the 
town thinks of your family. They don't want you to infect their top 
college-course pupils, the ones from the big houses on the hill. I 
don't know if I could do it, but I might try, because I want to get 
out of Castle Rock and go to college and never see my father or my 
brothers again. I want to go somewhere where nobody knows me 
and people don't have bad ideas about me before I've even done 
anything. But I don't know if I can do it.' 

'Why not?' 
'People. People drag you down.' 
'Who?' I asked, thinking he must mean the teachers, or his 
brother Eyeball, or maybe his parents. 

But he said, 'Your friends drag you down, Gordie. Don't 
you know that?' He pointed at Vern and Teddy, who were 
standing and waiting for us to catch up. They were laughing about 
something. 'Your friends do. They're like drowning guys who 
are holding on to your legs. You can't save them. You can only 
drown with them.' 

'Come on, guys,' Vern shouted. 'Don't be so slow!' 
'Yes, coming,' Chris called, and before I could say anything else 
he began to run, but he caught up to them before I could catch up 
to him. 

Chapter 14 
Darkness in the Forest 

We went another mile and then decided to camp for the night. 
There was still some daylight left, but nobody really wanted to 
use it. We were exhausted from what had happened at the 
dump and on the bridge, but it was more than that. We were in 

Harlow now, in the forest. Somewhere was a dead child, who 
probably had a broken body and was covered with flies. Nobody 
wanted to get too close to him with night approaching. By 
stopping here, we thought there had to be at least ten miles between 
us and him, and of course all four of us knew there were no such 
things as ghosts, but ten miles seemed about far enough if we 
were wrong. 

Vern, Chris and Teddy gathered wood and started a campfire. 
Chris laid it on stones and made a clear space around it because the 
forest was very dry and he didn't want to take any risks. While they 
were doing that, I sharpened some green sticks and pushed lumps 
of hamburger meat on to them. When the flames were low and the 
fire was good and hot, we cooked the meat, but we were too 
hungry to wait. We pulled the lumps off their sticks early. They 
were black on the outside, red on the inside and completely 
delicious. 

Afterwards Chris opened his backpack. He took out a packet of 
cigarettes and gave us one each. We lay back on the ground or 
against trees and smoked our cigarettes, as if we were grown men. 
We were feeling good. 

'There's nothing like a smoke after a meal,' Teddy said. 
'Absolutely,' Vern agreed. 
We laid our blankets out on the ground and lay down on them. 
Then for about an hour we fed the fire and talked — the kind of 
talk you can never quite remember when you get past fifteen and 
discover girls. We talked about fishing and sport, and about the 
summer that was now ending. Teddy told about the time he had 
been at White's Beach in Brunswick and some guy had hit his head 
while diving and had almost drowned. We had a long discussion 
about our teachers at school. 

We didn't talk about Ray Brower, but I was thinking about him. 
There's something horrible about the way darkness comes to the 
forest. There are no car lights to make it softer or less sudden; there 

are no mothers' voices calling for their children to come in now. If 
you're used to the town, the coming of the dark in the forest seems 
unnatural. 

And as I thought about the body of Ray Brower, I didn't 
feel frightened and wonder whether he would suddenly appear 
as a ghost. Unexpectedly I felt pity for him, lying so alone in the 
dark. If something wanted to eat him, it would. His mother 
wasn't here to stop it and neither was his father, nor any of his 
friends, nor Jesus Christ. He was dead and he was all alone, and 
I realized that if I didn't stop thinking about it I was going to 
cry. 

So I told the others a Le Dio story; Le Dio is a soldier I 
invented who had a lot of adventures in the Second World War. 
It wasn't a very good one. And when it ended, as the Le Dio 
stories usually did, with a single American soldier coughing 
out a dying promise of his love for America and for a girl 
back home, it was not his face I saw in my mind's eye but the 
face of a much younger boy, already dead, his eyes closed, 
blood running from the left corner of his mouth. And 
behind him, instead of war-scarred France, I saw only dark 
forest and the railway tracks dark at the top of a bank against the 
starry sky. 

Chapter 15 A Dream of Deep Water 

I woke up in the middle of the night. I didn't know where I was, 
and I wondered why it was so cold in my bedroom and who had 
left the windows open. 

Then I realized that this wasn't my room. This was somewhere 
else. And someone had his arms wrapped around me, while some-
one else was kneeling beside me, head turned as if listening to 
something. 

'What's happening?' I asked in puzzlement. 
The thing holding me made a noise. It sounded like Vern. 
That made me wake up properly and remember where I was. But 
what was everybody doing awake in the middle of the night? I had 
been asleep for some hours. 

'Don't let it get me,' Vern said. 'I promise I'll be good.' 
, I sat up, frightened. 'Chris?' 

'Shut up, Vern,' Chris said. He was the one next to me, listening. 
'It's nothing.' 
'Oh, yes it is,' Teddy said heavily. 'It's something.' 
'What is?' I asked. As if to answer my question, a long and hollow 
team rose from the forest. It was the sort of scream you might 
expect from a woman who was dying in extreme pain and extreme 
fear. 
'Oh, Jesus,' Vern whispered, his voice high and filled with tears. 
He tightened his hold on me, making it hard for me to breathe 
and adding to my own terror. I threw him loose, but he came 
straight back, like a young dog which can't think of anywhere else 
to go. 
'It's Brower,' Teddy whispered. 'His ghost is out walking in the 
forest.' 
'Oh, God!' Vern shouted. 'I promise I won't take any more sexy 
magazines from the shops. I promise to eat my vegetables. I won't 
swear. I won't. . .' 
'Shut up, Vern,' Chris said. But Vern's voice only dropped back 
to a whisper. Chris sounded strong, but underneath I could hear 
iff. I wondered if the hair was standing up on his neck as it was on 
mine. 
'It's a bird, isn't it?' I asked Chris. 
'No. At least I don't think it is. I think it's a wild cat My dad says 
they scream like hell at certain times of the year. It sounds like a 
woman, doesn't it?' 
'Yes,' I said. 

'But no woman could scream that loud,' Chris said . . . and then 
added helplessly, 'Could she, Gordie?' 

'It's his ghost,' Teddy whispered again. 'I'm going to go and look 
for it.' 

I don't think he was serious, but we took no chances. When he 
started to get up, Chris and I pulled him back down. 

'Let me go, you asses!' Teddy shouted. 'If I say I want to go and 
look for it, then I'm going to go and look for it! I want to see it! I 
want to see the ghost! I —' 

The wild cry rose into the night again, cutting the air like a 
knife and freezing us with our hands on Teddy. The scream 
climbed impossibly high, hung there for a moment and then slid 
down to the lowest imaginable sound. This was followed by a burst 
of what sounded like mad laughter . . . and then there was silence 
again. 

'Jesus H. Christ,' Teddy whispered, and he talked no more of 
going into the forest to see what was making that screaming 
noise. All four of us stayed close together and I thought of 
running. I doubt I was the only one. If we had been camping in 
Vern's field —where our parents thought we were — we probably 
would have run. But Castle Rock was too far, and the thought of 
trying to run across that bridge in the dark made my blood 
freeze. Running deeper into Harlow and closer to the body of 
Ray Brower was equally unthinkable. We had nowhere to go. If 
there was a ghost out there, and if it wanted us, it would probably 
get us. 

Chris suggested that we keep guard and everyone was agreeable 
to that. We spun coins to see who would go first. It was Vern, and I 
was last. Vern sat by the camp-fire while the rest of us lay down 
again, close to one another, like sheep. 

I was sure that sleep would be impossible, but I did sleep — a 
light, uneasy sleep that was as near to being awake as it was to 
being asleep. My half-sleeping dreams were filled with wild cries 

which were possibly real or possibly imagined. I saw — or 
thought I saw — something white and shapeless float through the 
trees. 

At last I slipped into something I knew was a dream. Chris 
and I were swimming at White's Beach, a lake in Brunswick. It 
was where Teddy had seen the boy hit his head and almost 
drown. In my dream we were out in deep water, swimming 
lazily along, with a hot July sun up in the sky. From behind us 
came cries and shouts of laughter. On the sandy beach, people 
lay face down on blankets, and little children played with plastic 
buckets at the edge of the water or sat happily pouring sand 
into their hair. Teenagers formed grinning groups and the boys 
watched the girls walk endlessly up and down in twos and 
threes, never alone, the secret places of their bodies wrapped in 
swimsuits. 

Mrs Cote, our English teacher from school, floated past us on a 
rubber boat. She was lying on her back, dressed in her usual 
September-to-june uniform of a grey suit. 

'Be careful boys,' she said. 'If you're not good I'll hit you so hard 
that you'll go blind. Now, Mr Chambers, we'll hear the poem 
"Mending Wall", please.' 

'I tried to give the money back,' Chris said. 'Mrs Simons said 
OK, but she took it! Do you hear me? She took it! Now what are 
you going to do about it? Are you going to hit her until she's 
blind?' 

' "Mending Wall", Mr Chambers, if you please.' 
Chris threw me a desperate look, as if to say Didn't I tell you it 
would be like this? and then began: 'Something there is that 
doesn't love a wall, that sends the —' And then his head went 
under, his mouth filling with water in the middle of repeating 
the poem. 

He broke through the surface, crying, 'Help me, Gordie! Help 
me!' 

Then he was dragged under again. Looking into the clear water, I 
could see two bare swollen bodies holding his ankles. One was Vern 
and the other was Teddy, and their open eyes were empty and 
white. Chris's head broke out of the water again. He reached one 
hand towards me and out of his mouth came a screaming, woman-
ish cry that rose and rose in the hot, sunny, summer air. I looked 
wildly towards the beach, but nobody had heard. Chris's scream 
was cut off as the bodies pulled him under the water again. As they 
dragged him down to black water, I could see his eyes turned up 
to me and his hands reaching out helplessly. But instead of diving 
down and trying to save him, I swam madly for the shore, or at 
least to a place where the water would not be over my head. 
Before I could get there — before I could even get close — I felt a 
soft, rotten hand wrap itself firmly around my leg and begin to 
pull. A scream started to rise in my chest . . . but before it came 
out, the dream passed into reality. There was Teddy with his hand 
on my leg. He was shaking me awake. It was my turn to keep 
guard. 

Chapter 16 
The Deer 

The others slept heavily through the rest of the night. I was some-
times awake and sometimes half asleep. The night was far from 
silent, with the cries of birds and mice and insects; but there were no 
more screams. 

Finally I came awake and realized that something was different. It 
took a moment or two to know what it was: although the moon 
was down, I could see my hands resting on my jeans. My watch said 
quarter to five. It was dawn. 

I stood and walked a few yards into the forest. I stretched and 
began to feel the fear of the night before slide away. It was a good 
feeling. 

I climbed up the bank to the railway tracks and sat on one of the 
tracks, spinning and catching stones. I was in no hurry to wake the 
others. The new day felt too good to share. 

I don't know how long I sat there, watching dawn turn to full 
morning, watching the sky change from purple to blue. I was about 
to get up when I looked to my right and saw a deer standing 
between the tracks not ten yards from me. 

My heart flew up into my throat. I didn't move. I couldn't move. 
Her eyes weren't brown, but a dark, dusty black. She looked calmly 
at me, her head held a little low in what looked like curiosity, seeing 
a boy with his hair standing up from sleep in jeans and brown shirt, 
sitting there on the tracks. What I was seeing was a gift, given with a 
kind of terrible carelessness. 

We looked at each other for a long time . . . I think it was a long 
time. Then she turned and walked off to the other side of the tracks. 
She found grass and began to eat. I couldn't believe it. She hadn't 
gone away; she had begun to eat. She didn't look back at me and 
didn't need to: I was frozen solid. 

Then the tracks started to shake under my body and seconds later 
the deer's head came up and turned back towards Castle Rock. She 
stood there for a moment and then she was gone in three leaps, 
disappearing into the forest with no sound except one dry branch 
that cracked like a gun. 

I sat and looked at the place where she had been until the actual 
sound of the train came through the stillness. Then I slid back down 
the bank to where the others were sleeping. 

The train woke them up. They yawned and scratched. There 
was some nervous talk about the 'screaming ghost', as Chris 
called it, but not as much as you might imagine. In daylight 
it seemed more foolish than interesting — almost embarrassing. 
Best forgotten. 

I nearly told them about the deer, but in the end I didn't. That 
was one thing I kept to myself. I've never spoken or written about 

I nearly told them about the deer, but in the end I didn't. 
That was one thing I kept to myself. 

it until just now, today. And I have to tell you that it seems less 
important when it is written down. But for me it was the best part 
of that trip, the cleanest part, and it was a moment I found myself 
returning to, almost helplessly, when there was trouble in my life: 
my first day in the forest in Vietnam, when this guy walked up 
with his hand over his nose, and he took his hand away and there 
was no nose there, because a bullet had taken if off; the time the 
doctor told us that our son might have a brain infection; the long, 
crazy weeks before my mother died. I would find my thoughts 
turning back to that morning. But the most important things are 
the hardest to say. It's hard to make strangers care about the good 
things in life. 

Chapter 17 Leeches 

The tracks now bent south-west and ran through thick forest. "We 
ate a breakfast of wild fruit. Vern wished aloud for a couple of filed 
eggs with bacon on the side. 

This was the last day of the heat and I think it was the worst of 
all. By nine o'clock the sky was a pale steel colour that made you 
feel hotter just from looking at it. The sweat ran from our chests 
and backs, and washed away some of the dirt. Insects were a 
constant annoyance. We knew we still had eight or ten miles to 
walk, but the thing pulled us towards itself and kept us walking 
fast, even in that heat. We were all crazy to see that boy's body — I 
can't say it any more simply or honestly than that. We didn't 
know whether it was going to be harmless or horrible, but we 
wanted to see it. 

It was about half past nine when Teddy and Chris saw water. 
They shouted to Vern and me, and we ran over to where they were 
standing. There was a deep pool, which was fed by a little stream, 
which continued under the tracks. 

'Do you think it's deep enough to swim in?' Vern asked, looking 
hungrily at the water. 

'There's only one way to find out,' Teddy said. 
'Who goes first?' I asked. 
'Me!' Chris said. He went running down the bank, kicking off 
his shoes and untying his shirt from around his waist as he went. He 
pushed his trousers down with his thumbs, pulled off his socks and 
made a shallow dive. He came up shaking his head to get his wet 
hair out of his eyes. 'It's great!' he shouted. 

'How deep is it?' Teddy called back. He had never learned to 
swim. 

Chris stood up in the water and his shoulders broke the surface. I 
saw something grey on one of them. I decided it was a piece of mud 
and didn't think any more about it. If I had looked more closely I 
could have saved myself a lot of bad dreams later on. 'Come on in, 
you pussies!' Chris called. 

We all got undressed. Vern was in next, then me. The water was 
clean and cool. I swam across to Chris, loving the feel of having 
nothing on except water. I stood up and we grinned in each other's 
faces. 

'Great!' We both said it at exactly the same moment. 
We played around in the water for almost half an hour before 
we realized that the pool was full of leeches. We were diving, 
swimming between each other's legs, pushing one another 
beneath the surface of the water. Then Vern swam into the 
shallower part, went under and stood on his hands. When his legs 
were up in the air I saw that they were covered in blackish-grey 
lumps, just like the one I had seen on Chris's shoulder. They were 
big leeches. 

Chris's mouth dropped open and I felt all the blood in my 
body freeze. Teddy screamed and his face went pale. Then all 
three of us made our way as fast as we could for the side. I know 
more about leeches now than I did then, but, although I know 

they are mostly harmless, I feel the same horror about them now 
as I have felt ever since that day in the pool. You don't feel them 
come on to your body. If you don't happen to see them, they'll 
go on feeding until their swollen bodies fall off you or they 
actually burst. 

We pulled ourselves up on to the bank and Teddy started scream-
ing as he looked down at himself. He started to pull the leeches off 
his bare body, still screaming. 

Vern broke the water and looked at us in puzzlement. 'What the 
hell's wrong with him?' 

'Leeches!' Teddy screamed, pulling two off his legs and throwing 
them as far as he could. 

'OhGodOhGodOhGodOhGod!' Vern cried. He swam over to the 
edge of the pool and pulled himself out. 

I was still feeling cold; the heat of the day was interrupted. I kept 
telling myself not to scream, not to be a pussy. I picked half a dozen 
off my arms and several more off my chest. 

Chris turned his back to me. 'Gordie? Are there any more? Take 
them off if there are, Gordie, please.' There were more — five or six of 
them, running down his back like horrible black buttons. I pulled 
their soft, boneless bodies off him. 

1 was starting to feel a little better. I brushed my hair away 
from my ears . . . and that's when I felt the big one. It had gone 
down inside my ear, it seemed, so that only its back was still 
outside, and that's the part I had touched. I tried to get hold of 
it, but I couldn't see it. I held on to it tightly and pulled. It burst 
in my fingers as I pulled it off, and blood - my blood — ran 
down the side of my face and into my ear in a warm stream. I 
couldn't stop the tears coming then. I washed my ear and got 
dressed. 

Vern ran up to me, still bare. 'Are they off me, Gordie? Have they 
all gone?' 

He spun in front of me like a crazy dancer. I nodded that they 

were and kept on crying for a while. Finally the tears began to slow 
down. 

When we were all dressed we just stood there looking at one 
another for a moment, and then we began to climb the bank up 
to the tracks. I looked back at the burst leeches lying on top of 
the flattened grass where we had danced and screamed them off 
our bodies. 

Chapter 18 
Short Shadows, Dusty Shoes 

We walked on, and were beginning to think that we were getting 
close. But we weren't as close as we thought. We knew we wanted 
to reach the place where the Back Harlow Road met the tracks, we 
knew that the Back Harlow Road ran by the Royal River, and we 
knew the Royal River was only ten miles from Castle River. But 
those ten miles were measured in a straight line, and the railway 
tracks made a long, slight curve around some hills called The Bluffs. 
If we had looked at a map we'd have seen that curve easily, and we'd 
have realized that it was more like sixteen miles between the two 
rivers, walking along the tracks. And there was nowhere else to 
walk. 

Chris began to suspect the truth when midday had come and 
gone and the Royal still hadn't appeared. We stopped while he 
climbed a tall tree and looked round. He came down and told us it 
was going to be at least four in the afternoon before we reached the 
Royal, if we moved fast. 

Jesus!' Teddy swore. 'What are we going to do now?' 
We looked into each other's sweaty faces. We were hungry and 
tired. The big adventure had turned into hard work. We were 
dirty and sometimes frightened. By now our parents would be 
wondering where we were, and the police might even be looking 
for us if Milo Pressman or the engineer on the train crossing the 

bridge had told them anything. We had been planning to hitch-
hike back to Castle Rock, but four o'clock was just three hours 
from dark and nobody picks up four boys in a back country road 
after dark. 

Finally Chris said, 'It's still closer if we carry on. Let's go.' 
He turned and started to walk along the tracks in his dusty shoes, 
head down, his shadow short at his feet. A few seconds later the rest 
of us followed, one after another. 

Chapter 19 A Serious Matter 

I have sometimes wondered why we decided to walk from Castle 
Rock to Harlow on the railway tracks. I imagine a conversation 
between the four of us. 

'We could easily hitchhike up Route 7,' I say, 'until it joins the 
Back Harlow Road. With a little luck we'll find Ray Brower only a 
few hours after we leave.' 

'That's too easy, man says Teddy, and Vern adds, 'Don't be such a 
pussy, Gordie. It will really be something to walk along the tracks.' 
Chris only smiles. 

So we didn't take the shorter way, the easier way. They say the 
effect of events can grow larger and larger as the years pass, so who 
knows? If we hadn't walked along the tracks maybe Chris and 
Teddy and Vern would still be alive today. No, they didn't die in 
the forest or on the railway tracks. No one dies in this story except 
some leeches and Ray Brower, and he was dead before the story 
started, actually. But it is true that of the four of us who spun coins 
to see who would go down to the Florida Market to get food, 
only the one who went is still alive, at the ripe old age of thirty-
four. 

Maybe we knew, or half knew, that going to see a dead body was 
a big thing, as big as sleeping with a girl for the first time. And the 

big things in life should never be easy; they should be marked in 
some way as important. You don't hitchhike to a thing like that, 
perhaps. So if walking along the tracks turned out to be harder than 
we had expected, maybe we thought that was right. Events had 
turned our trip into what we had always suspected it was: a serious 
matter. 

What we didn't know as we walked around The Bluffs was 
that Billy Tessio, Charlie Hogan, Jack Mudgett, Norman 'Fuzzy' 
Brackowicz, Vince Desjardins, Chris's older brother Eyeball 
and Ace Merrill himself were all on their way to take a look at 
the body themselves. They were climbing into Ace's black 1952 
Ford and Vince's pink 1954 Studebaker even as we started on the 
last part of our trip. 

Billy and Charlie had managed to keep their enormous secret for 
just about twenty-four hours. Then Charlie told Ace while they 
were drinking at the bar, and Billy told Jack Mudgett while they 
were fishing from the Boom Road Bridge. Both Ace and Jack had 
sworn to keep the secret - and that was how everyone in their gang 
knew about it by midday. 

Fuzzy suggested that they could all become heroes by 'finding' 
the body. They could tell the police they had gone to the Royal 
River to fish and had found the body instead. 

They were driving fast up the road from Castle Rock to the Back 
Harlow area just as we finally started to get close. 

Chapter 20 
The Body 

Clouds began to gather in the sky around two o'clock, but at first 
none of us thought it would rain. After all, it hadn't rained since the 
early days of July. But they kept building up to the south of us in 
great purple columns, and they began to move slowly in our 
direction. 

Finally we had to accept that it was going to rain. In the hour 
between two and three the quality of the day's light began to 
change. It was just as hot as before, but we knew. The birds knew as 
well; they seemed to appear from nowhere and fill the sky with 
their cries. The light grew less definite and our shadows became 
less clear. The sun had begun to sail in and out of the thickening 
clouds, and the southern sky turned brown. We watched the 
enormous thunderclouds come closer and threaten the land. 
Sometimes lightning flashed within the clouds and changed their 
purplish colour to a light grey. Then we saw lightning flash down 
from the nearest cloud. It was followed by a long, shaking burst 
of thunder. 

We complained a bit about how wet we were going to get, but of 
course we were looking forward to it. It would be cool . . . and 
there would be no leeches in this water. 

Around half past three we saw running water through a break in 
the trees. 

'That's it!' Chris shouted happily. 'That's the Royal!' 
We began to walk faster. The storm was getting close now. 
The air began to move and the temperature dropped suddenly 
I looked down and saw that my shadow had completely 
disappeared. 

We were walking in pairs again, two on either side of the tracks, 
so that we could look down both sides of the railway bank. My 
mouth was dry with nervousness. The sun finally sailed behind 
the clouds and didn't reappear. The light became dull. We could 
smell the river clearly — or perhaps it was the smell of the rain in 
the air. 

A sudden impossible flash of lightning lit the area, making me cry 
out and cover my eyes. I heard the tearing fall of some big tree 
about sixty yards away. The crack of thunder which followed made 
me stop for a second in fear. I wanted to be at home reading a good 
book in a safe place. 

'Jesus!' Vern screamed in a high voice. 'Look at that!' 
I looked up in the direction Vern was pointing and saw a 
blue-white fireball rolling fast up the left track, sounding exactly 
like an angry cat. It hurried past us as we turned in amazement 
to watch it go. Twenty feet beyond us it suddenly burst and 
disappeared. 

'What am I doing here?' Teddy said. 
'Man!' Chris said happily. 'It is going to rain like it's never rained 
before!' 

But I agreed with Teddy. The sky was alarming. Lightning 
flashed down again and this time there was no pause before the 
following thunder. 

My ears were still ringing from the thunder when Vern began to 
shout: 'THERE! THERE HE IS! I SEE HIM!' 

I can see Vern still, if I want to. All I have to do is sit back for a 
minute and close my eyes. He's standing there on the left of the 
tracks, one hand protecting his eyes from the lightning that has just 
come down, the other stretched out and pointing. 

We ran up beside him and looked. I was thinking to myself, 
Vern's just imagining it, that's all. But he wasn't, although for a second 
I wished he was. In that moment I knew I never wanted to see a 
dead body, not even of a tiny animal. 

At the bottom of the bank was a boggy, smelly mess of 
bushes and appearing out of the bushes was a single, pale, white 
hand. 

Did any of us breathe? 1 didn't. 
The wind was blowing quite strongly at times now, and was 
coming at us from no particular direction. I hardly noticed. Why 
couldn't we have seen the whole body instead of just that one 
hand, horribly white, the fingers resting upside down on the 
ground? That hand told us the truth of the whole matter. It 
made us know that death was real. The memory of that hand 
comes back to me every time I hear or read of some tragic 

At the bottom of the bank was a boggy, smelly mess of bushes and 
appearing out of the bushes was a single, pale, white hand. 

disaster. Somewhere, joined to that hand, was the rest of Ray 
Brower. 

Lightning flashed. Thunder cracked after each flash of 
lightning. 

'Jesus!' Chris whispered. 
Vern's tongue was running over his lips as if he had just tasted 
something new and different - something which excited him and 
disgusted him at the same time. 

Teddy only stood and looked. The wind blew his dirty hair first 
away from his ears and then back over them. His face was totally 
blank. 

There were black insects walking on the hand. 
A great whispering noise began to rise in the forest on both sides 
of the tracks, as if the forest had just noticed we were there and was 
commenting on it. The rain had started. 

Enormous drops of rain fell for five seconds and then stopped. 
There was a pause, and then the storm really started. Immediately 
we were all completely wet. The whispering sound changed; now it 
sounded like millions of hammers. It was as if the forest was blaming 
us for our discovery. 

Chris jumped over the side of the bank and I followed. Vern 
and Teddy were close behind us, but Chris and I were the first 
to reach the body of Ray Brower. He was face down. Chris 
looked into my eyes. I nodded slightly, as if he had spoken 
aloud. 

I think he was down here and fairly undamaged instead of up 
there between the tracks and completely knocked out of shape 
because he was trying to get out of the way when the train hit him. 
He had landed with his head towards the tracks, arms over his head 
like someone about to dive. He had landed in boggy ground which 
was rapidly filling with water. His hair was dark red. There was 
blood in it, but not a lot - not enough to make you feel sick. The 
insects were worse. He was wearing a dark green T-shirt and blue 

jeans. His feet were bare and a few feet behind him, caught in a 
bush, I saw a pair of dirty shoes. For a moment I was puzzled — why 
was he here and his shoes there? Then I realized, and the realization 
was like a heavy blow to the stomach. My wife, my children, my 
friends — they all think that having an imagination like mine must 
be quite nice: not only do I make a lot of money from it, but I can 
also see films in my mind when I want to. But sometimes my 
imagination turns out to have long, sharp, cruel teeth. You see 
things you would prefer not to see, things that keep you awake all 
night. I saw one of those things then; I saw it clearly and with 
absolute certainty. He was knocked clean out of his shoes. The 
train had knocked him out of his shoes just as it had knocked the 
life out of his body. 

That was what finally made me realize that the guy was dead. 
He wasn't ill, he wasn't sleeping. He wasn't going to get up 
in the morning any more, or eat too many apples, or worry 
about school exams. He was dead, completely dead. He wasn't 
going to go out with his friends in the spring to collect bottles 
uncovered by the departing snow. He wasn't going to get into 
fights in the playground. He wasn't going to pull a single girl's 
hair. He was everything like wasn't, can't, don't, shouldn't, wouldn't, 
couldn't. He was one big not. He was dead. I could go on all 
day and not explain the distance between his bare feet on the 
ground and his dirty shoes hanging on the bush. It was about three 
feet, it was millions and millions of miles. He was disconnected 
from his shoes and there was no hope of reconnection. He was 
dead. 

We turned him face up into the pouring rain, the lightning, the 
steady crack of thunder. 

There were insects all over his face and neck. They ran in and out 
of the round collar of his T-shirt. His eyes were open but horribly 
wrong: one was rolled back so far that we could see only white, the 
other stared straight up into the storm. There was some dried blood 

around his mouth and on his chin, and a wound on the right side of 
his face. Still, I thought, he didn't look too bad. I had once walked 
into a door my brother Dennis was pushing open, and I had looked 
worse than this. 

An insect came out of his mouth, walked across his cheek, 
stepped on to the leaf of a plant and was gone. 

'Did you see that?' Teddy asked in a high, strange voice. 'I bet 
he's full of insects! I bet his brains are -' 

'Shut up, Teddy,' Chris said. 
Lightning lit up his one good eye. You could almost believe he 
was glad to see us, boys his own age. His body was swollen and there 
was the slight smell of some gas. 

I turned away. I was sure I was going to be sick, but my 
stomach was dry and steady. I pushed two fingers down my 
throat, trying to make myself puke, wanting to, needing to. But 
nothing happened. 

The noise of the rain and the thunder had completely covered 
the sound of cars approaching along the Back Harlow Road, which 
lay a few yards beyond this boggy area. It also covered the sound of 
them pushing through the trees and the bushes. The first we knew 
of them was Ace Merrill's voice calling above the noise of the 
storm, saying: 'What have we got here?' 

Chapter 21 
Ace Merrill 

We all jumped in surprise and Vern cried out. He admitted later 
that he thought, just for a second, that the voice had come from the 
dead boy. 

On the far side of the boggy area, where the forest started again 
and hid the end of the road, Ace Merrill and Eyeball Chambers 
stood together. 

'Hell!' Eyeball said. 'That's my little brother!' 

Chris was staring at Eyeball with his mouth open. His wet shirt 
was still tied around his waist. His backpack, darker green now 
because of the rain, was hanging against his bare back. 

'You go away, Rich,' he said. 'We found him.' 
'It doesn't matter. We're going to report him.' 
'No, you're not,' I said. I was suddenly angry with them. I was 
determined that this one time the older guys weren't going to just 
take something from the younger ones. They had come in cars. I 
think that's what made me angriest. After all our hard work, they 
had come in cars. 'There are four of us, Eyeball.' 

In answer, Vince Desjardins, Charlie Hogan and Vern's brother 
Billy stepped through the trees behind Ace and Eyeball, and they 
were followed by Jack Mudgett and Fuzzy Brackowicz. 

'Here we all are,' Ace said, grinning. 'So you just —' 
' VERN!' Billy Tessio cried in a terrible, accusing voice. 'You 
little worm! You were under the front of the house. You heard us 
talking!' 

Vern looked frightened. 
Charlie Hogan supported Billy. 'I ought to beat the puke out of 
you!' 

'Yeah? Come on, then,' Teddy suddenly shouted. His eyes were 
shining crazily behind his rain-washed glasses. 'Come on, then. 
We'll fight you for the body. Come on, you big men.' 

Billy and Charlie stepped forward, but Ace put a hand on their 
shoulders. 'Now listen, you guys,' he said patiently, as if we weren't 
standing in a rainstorm. 'There are more of us than there are of you. 
We're bigger. We'll give you one chance to disappear. I don't care 
where. Just leave.' 

Eyeball laughed and Fuzzy slapped Ace on the back. 
'Because we're taking him.' Ace smiled gently. 'If you go, we'll 
take him. If you stay, we'll hurt you and then take him. Anyway, 
Charlie and Billy found him first.' 

'They were pussies!' Teddy shouted back. 'Vern told us about it. 

They were too frightened to do anything about it.' He copied 
Charlie Hogan's voice.' "It's a pity we stole that car! It's a pity we 
went to the Back Harlow Road! Oh, Billy, what are we going to 
do? Oh, Billy, I think I just puked on my shoes!"' 

Charlie started forward again. I looked wildly at Ray Brower. He 
stared calmly up into the rain with his one eye. There was still 
thunder, but the rain was getting lighter. 

'What do you say, Gordie?' Ace asked. He was holding Charlie 
lightly by the arm. 'You must have at least some of your brother's 
sense. Tell these guys to go away. I'll let Charlie beat up the one 
with glasses a bit, but that's all. What do you say?' 

He was wrong to mention Denny. I had wanted to explain that 
we had really found the body first, since Charlie and Billy hadn't 
been interested. I wanted to tell him about the train on the bridge; 
about Milo Pressman and his fearless but stupid dog; about the 
leeches. I wanted to say: come on, Ace, be fair. But he had to 
mention Denny, and instead of a reasonable argument, what I heard 
coming out of my mouth was certain death: 'Go to hell, Ace,' I said. 

Ace's mouth formed a perfect O of surprise. Everyone, on both 
sides of the bog, stared at me in amazement. 

Then Teddy screamed happily, 'That's telling him, Gordie! 
Yeah, man!' 

I stood still, unable to believe what I had done. I was like an actor 
on stage who has just spoken the wrong words. Out of the corner of 
my eye I saw that Chris was digging in the bottom of his backpack, 
but I didn't immediately understand. 

'OK,' Ace said softly. 'Let's get them. Don't hurt anyone 
except the Lachance boy. I'm going to break both his arms.' And 
he meant it. 

They started to walk towards us through the rain. Jackie 
Mudgett took a knife out of his pocket. Vern and Teddy dropped 
into fighting positions on either side of me. Teddy did so eagerly, 
Vern with a desperate look on his face. 

Ace and his gang moved towards us in a line through the mud. 
The body of Ray Brower lay at our feet. I got ready to fight. . . and 
that was when Chris used the gun he had taken from his father's 
desk. 

KA-BLAM! 

God, what a wonderful sound that was! Charlie Hogan jumped up 
into the air. Ace Merrill, who had been staring straight at me, 
turned round and looked at Chris. His mouth made that O again. 
Eyeball looked amazed. 

'Chris that's Daddy's gun,' he said. 'He's really going to hurt you 
for that.' 

'That's nothing compared to what you'll get,' Chris said. His 
face was horribly pale and his eyes flashed. 'You all know Charlie 
and Billy didn't want to come at first. We wouldn't have walked all 
the way out here if they were going to come. They just went 
somewhere and puked the story up and let Ace Merrill do all the 
thinking.' His voice rose to a scream. 'But you aren't going to get him, 

do you hear me?' 

'Now listen,' Ace said. 'You'd better put that down before you 
shoot your foot off. You haven't got the courage to shoot a 
mouse.' He began to walk forward again, smiling the gentle smile 
as he came. 'I'm going to make you eat that gun.' 

'Ace, if you don't stand still, I'm going to shoot you, I swear to 
God.' 

'You'll go to jail,' Ace said. He continued to advance. He was still 
smiling. The rest of us were frozen, watching and waiting. Ace 
didn't think a twelve-year-old boy would shoot him; I thought he 
was wrong. I thought Chris would shoot Ace before he would let 
Ace take his father's gun away from him. In those few seconds I was 
sure there was going to be bad trouble, the worst I'd ever known. 
Killing trouble, maybe. And all about who would report finding a 
dead body. 

Chris said softly, with great regret, 'Where do you want it, Ace? 
Arm or leg? I can't decide. You decide for me.' 
And Ace stopped. 

Chapter 22 
Hailstones 

His face fell and I saw sudden terror in it. It wasn't Chris's words, I 
think, it was the way he spoke them - the real regret that things were 
going to go from bad to worse. 

Ace controlled himself. 'All right,' he said softly, speaking to 
Chris. 'But you know what's going to happen to you, don't you?' 

'No, I don't,' Chris said. 
'You little worm!' Eyeball said loudly. 'You're going to end up in 
hospital.' 

'Kiss my ass,' Chris told him. 
With an angry cry Eyeball started forward, and Chris put a bullet 
into the water about ten feet in front of him. Eyeball jumped back, 
cursing. 

'OK,' Ace said. 'Now what?' 
'Now you guys are going to get back into your cars and go back 
to Castle Rock. After that, I don't care. But you aren't getting him,' 
He touched Ray Brower lightly with his foot. 'Do you 
understand?' 

'But we'll get you,' Ace said. He was starting to smile again. 
'Don't you know that? We'll hurt you. Sincerely. I can't believe you 
don't know that.' 

'Oh, why don't you go home and . . .' 
Then the storm came back and the sound drowned out his 
words. This time the storm was even stronger; and this time it was 
hail instead of rain. The hailstones were enormous, and the sound 
they made when they hit the leaves and the trees was unbelievably 
loud. Stones began to hit my shoulders; it felt as if some evil creature 

was throwing them, intending to hurt. But the hailstones also began 
to hit Ray Brower's face with an awful sound, as if they were 
sinking into him. 

Vern gave in first. With a scream he ran up the bank. Teddy 
waited only a minute, then followed Vern, his hands held up over 
his head. On the other side Vince Desjardins disappeared back 
under the cover of some trees and Fuzzy Brackowicz soon joined 
him. But the rest of them stayed where they were and Ace began to 
grin again. 

'Stay with me, Gordie,' Chris said in a low, shaky voice, 'Stay 
with me, man.' 

'I'm here.' 
'Go away now,' Chris said to Ace, and he was able by some magic 
to get the shaking out of his voice. He sounded as if he was giving 
instructions to a stupid child. 

'We'll get you,' Ace said. 'We won't forget this.' 
'OK,' Chris said. 'That's another day.' 
'We're going to enjoy getting you, Chambers. We'll —' 
'Get out of here!' Chris suddenly screamed, and pointed the gun. 
Ace stepped back. 

He looked threateningly at Chris for a moment longer, nodded, 
then turned round. 'Come on' he said to the others. He looked 
back over his shoulder at Chris and me once more. 'We'll see you 
later.' 

They went back into the trees between the bog and the road. 
Chris and I stood perfectly still, in spite of the hail which was so 
hard that it was making our skin red and which was piling up all 
around us like snow. We stood and listened until we heard the 
sound of the engines of two cars. 

Chris went and checked that they were really gone. When he 
came back he said, 'We did it.' I was shaking all over. 

We looked at each other warmly for a second and then looked 
down together. A nasty thrill of fear shot through me and the sound 

of Chris moving his feet let me know that he too had seen it. Ray 
Brower's eyes had become wide and white, as if he was staring 
blindly. A second later I understood what had happened, but under-
standing didn't make the horror less. His eyes had filled up with 
round, white hailstones. Now water was running down his cheeks 
as if he was crying. Chris and I just looked at each other helplessly. 

Branches cracked behind us. I spun round, sure that Ace and the 
others were coming back, but it was Vern and Teddy. 

'What are we going to do, man?' Chris asked. He was still 
looking down at the body and I didn't know whether he was 
talking to me or to it. 

'We're going to take him back, aren't we?' Teddy asked, puzzled. 
'We're going to be heroes. Isn't that right, man?' He looked from 
Chris to me and back to Chris again. 

Chris looked up as if he was suddenly waking up from a dream. 
He walked over to Teddy and pushed him in the chest so hard 
that he fell down in the mud. 'You shut up!' Chris said. 'You 
pussy!' 

'It was the hail!' Teddy cried out, angry and ashamed. 'It wasn't 
those guys, Chris! I'm frightened of storms! I can't help it!' He 
began to cry, sitting there in the mud and the water. 

'What about you?' Chris asked, turning to Vern. 'Are you afraid 
of storms too?' 

Vern shook his head, surprised by Chris's anger. 'No, man, I 
thought we were all going to run.' 

'But you ran first, you pussy, so how did you know we were all 
going to run?' 

Vern swallowed nervously and said nothing. 
He turned to me. 'We're going to carry him back, Gordie.' 
'If you say so, Chris. But what if those guys -' 

'I don't care about those guys. You 're all pussies.' 
'Chris, they could call the police, for revenge.' 
'I DON'T CARE!' he screamed, and leapt at me. But one 

of his feet hit Ray Brewer's body. He fell to the ground and lay in 
the exact position Ray Brower was lying. I looked wildly at Chris's 
feet to make sure his shoes were still on. Then he began to cry and 
scream, beating his hands and feet on the wet ground. Teddy and 
Vern were staring at him in amazement, because nobody had ever 
seen Chris Chambers cry before. After a moment or two I walked 
back to the bank, climbed it and sat down on one of the tracks. 
Teddy and Vern followed me. There we sat in the rain. 

Chapter 23 
A Twenty-Year-Old Dream 

It was twenty minutes before Chris climbed the bank to sit down 
beside us. The clouds had begun to break and in places the sun was 
shining through. Chris was covered in mud from head to foot. 

'You're right, Gordie,' he said. 'He doesn't belong to anyone.' 
I nodded. Five minutes passed. No one said anything. Then I had a 
thought: what if they did call the police? I went back down the bank 
and over to where Chris had been standing. I got down on my 
knees and began to search through the water and grass with my 
fingers. 

'What are you doing?' Teddy asked, joining me. 
'To your left, I think,' Chris said, and pointed. 
I looked and after a minute or two I found both cartridges. They 
flashed in the sunlight. I gave them to Chris. He nodded and pushed 
them into his pocket. 

'Now we go,' Chris said. 
'No, man!' Teddy cried. 'I want to take him!' 
'Listen, stupid,' Chris said. 'If we take him back we could get 
into real trouble. Gordie was right. Those guys could tell any story 
they wanted. What if they said we killed him? How would you 
like that?' 

Teddy was silent. 

'We're going to walk fast back to the bridge,' Chris said. 'Then 
we'll leave the tracks and come into Castle Rock from the other 
direction. If people ask where we were, we'll say we were camping 
up on Brickyard Hill and got lost.' 

'Milo Pressman knows better,' I said. 
'We'll say Milo frightened us and that's when we decided to go 
up on the Brickyard.' 

I nodded. We were all on our feet now, ready to go. The birds 
were singing madly, pleased with the rain and now the sun and all 
the worms appearing above ground. We all turned round, as if 
pulled by strings, and looked back at Ray Brower. 

He was lying there, alone again. We had turned him over, so 
it looked as if he was just lying in the sunshine. Then you saw 
the blood on the chin and under the nose, and his slightly swollen 
body. You saw that the flies had come out with the sun and were 
beginning to settle on the body. You remembered the smell. He was 
a boy our age, and he was dead. 

'OK,' said Chris. 'Let's go.' 
We started back the way we had come. We didn't talk. I don't 
know about the others, but I was too busy thinking to talk. There 
were things that worried me about the body of Ray Brower — they 
worried me then and they worry me now. 

He didn't seem to be badly hurt. But the train must have hit 
him — why else would his shoes be of his feet? Perhaps the train had 
hit him hard enough to knock him down the bank but not hard 
enough to kill him. That was just possible, if he had been trying to 
get out of the train's way. Then he had lain awake down there in the 
mud, too frightened to move, in pain and not knowing where he 
was. I caught a wounded bird once and it died of fear in my hands. 
Perhaps Ray Brower had died because he was simply too frightened 
to go on living. 

But there was another thing, which worried me most of all. All 
the news reports said that he had been carrying a bucket when he 

went off to pick fruit. Back in Castle Rock, I went to the library 
and checked in the newspapers. But we never saw the bucket. 
Where was it? He must have thrown it away somewhere between 
Chamberlain and the boggy ground in Harlow where he died. 
He must have thrown it away when he was just too lost and 
frightened to go on carrying such a useless object. 

I've thought of going back to look for the bucket. I've thought of 
driving to the end of the Back Harlow Road and chasing a twenty-
year-old dream. I get my backpack out of the car, take off my shirt 
and tie it around my waist. I find the boggy ground. Is the grass 
growing yellow there in the shape of a human body? Of course not, 
there's no sign. Then I climb the bank up to the now rusty tracks 
and rotted wood and start walking towards Chamberlain. I feel sure 
that somewhere, to one side of the tracks, I would find the bucket. It 
would show that there had once been a thirteen-year-old Gordon 
Lachance. 

It's a stupid idea, of course, but the line between childhood and 
adulthood is narrower than most people like to think. And at times 
we all feel closer to the children we once were than to the boring, 
sensible adults we have become. And I remember those days at the 
end of that summer so well, and I think: that boy was me. And then 
the fearful thought comes: Which boy do you mean? 

Chapter 24 
Love Has Teeth 

We got back to Castle Rock a little past five o'clock on Sunday 
morning. We had walked all night. Nobody complained, although 
our feet hurt and we were unbelievably hungry. We crossed the 
bridge in safety, passed through the dump with no sign of Milo 
Pressman and the now-not-so-awful Chopper, and finally reached 
town. We stood in front of our tree house and looked at it, so that 
we didn't have to look at one another. 

At last Teddy said, 'I'll see you in school on Wednesday. I think 
I'm going to sleep till then.' 

'Me too,' Vern agreed. 'But Billy's going to get me.' 
'So what?' Chris said. 'Richie's going to get me and Ace is 
probably going to get Gordie and one of the others will get Teddy. 
But we did it.' 

'That's right,' Vern said. But he still sounded unhappy. 
Vern and Teddy left. I hesitated for a second before going home, 
and Chris said, 'I'll walk with you.' 

'OK.' 
We walked for a while without talking. Castle Rock was 
wonderfully quiet in the day's first light. I almost expected to turn a 
corner and see my deer standing there. 

Finally Chris spoke. 'Vern and Teddy will tell others,' he 
said. 

'Yes,' I said. 'But not today or tomorrow, if that's what you're 
worried about. Maybe not for years.' 

He looked at me, surprised. 
'At first they won't know what to say,' I explained. 'And then it 
will start to seem like a dream and they'll be too embarrassed to talk 
about it, and then . . . it sounds crazy, but 1 think they'll almost 
forget it ever happened.' 

He nodded. 'You see through people, Gordie.' 
We had reached the corner of my street. I wanted to say 
something more to Chris and didn't know how to. 

'Shake hands, man,' he said, sounding tired. 
'Chris —' 
'Shake.' 
We shook. 
'I'll see you.' 
He grinned. 'Not if I see you first.' 
He walked off, still laughing, as if he didn't hurt like me and 
wasn't covered in insect bites; as if he didn't have a care in the world, 

and wasn't returning to a dirty three-room house with no running 
water and broken windows covered with plastic 

Even if I had known the right thing to say I probably couldn't 
have said it. Talking destroys the effects of love. Love isn't soft, like 
those poets say. Love has teeth which bite and the wounds never 
close. No word can close those love-bites. In fact, if the wounds dry 
up, the words will stop too. 

Chapter 25 
Empty Kitchen 

Back home the kitchen was empty. I took off my clothes and 
washed all over, until the skin began to hurt. I made myself an 
enormous breakfast. While I was eating, my mother came into the 
kitchen. 

'Gordon, where have you been?' 
'Camping,' I said. 'We started in Vern's field and then went up 
the Brickyard Hill. Vern's mother said she would speak to you. 
Didn't she?' 

'She probably spoke to your father,' she said, and walked over to 
the cupboard. She sighed. 'I miss Dennis most in the mornings,' she 
said. 'I always look in his room and it's always empty.' 
'Thats 
terrible,' I said. 

'He always slept with the curtains open and the blankets . . . 
Gordon? Did you say something?' 
'Nothing important, Mum.' 

Chapter 26 Some People Drown 

The story never did get out. Ace Merrill phoned the police without 
leaving his name, and that's how they found the body. Neither his 
gang nor ours became heroes. 

I knew straight away whose car it was, before Ace 
and Fuzzy got out of it. 

Milo Pressman never said a word. Chris's dad hadn't noticed that 
Chris was gone; he was too drunk. Teddy's mum got worried on 
the second night and called Vern's mum. Vern's mum said that we 
were in the field - she knew because she could see the lights on 
in the tent. Teddy's mum said she hoped no one was smoking 
cigarettes in there. Vern's mum said she was sure none of Vern's or 
Billy's friends smoked. 

So the story never came out - but that wasn't the end of it. One 
day near the end of the month, when I was walking home from 
school, a black Ford stopped in front of me. I knew straight away 
whose car it was, before Ace and Fuzzy got out of it. 

I dropped my school books and ran, but they caught me within a 
few yards. If an old lady hadn't come out of her house, I don't know 
what would have happened. As it was, they broke my nose and two 
fingers, as well as giving me a large number of minor injuries. 

Chris's brother broke his arm in two places and left his face as 
colourful as a sunrise. Teddy and Vern were hurt too. Various stories 
went round the school, all wildly wrong. 

When the injuries mended, Vern and Teddy just drifted away. 
They had discovered a whole new group of people our age who 
would do what they said. They started bringing them to the tree 
house, and Chris and I started going there less and less. I think the 
last time I went there was in the spring of 1961, 

Teddy and Vern slowly became just two more faces in school. We 
nodded and said Hi. That was all. It happens. Friends come in and 
out of your life like waiters in a restaurant. But when I think of that 
dream, the swollen dead bodies under the water pulling at my legs, 
it seems right that friends should come and go. Some people drown. 
It's not fair, but it happens. Some people drown. 

Chapter 27 Tears for a Friend 

Vern Tessio was killed in a fire that destroyed a house in Lewiston in 
1966. There had been a large party in the house the night before. 
Someone fell asleep holding a cigarette — Vern himself, perhaps, 
dreaming of his lost pennies. 

Teddy, who had always wanted to join the army, was refused, of 
course. Everyone knew he would be, because of his eyes and his 
ears — everyone except Teddy. He started missing school, going to 
the places Ace and Fuzzy and the rest had gone before him. After 
school he got a job filling holes in the road. He bought himself a car. 
One day when it was full of his friends, and they were all drinking, 
he crashed into a tree, turned the car over. It rolled six times and no 
one came out alive. 

Chris joined the college courses. His parents thought he was 
crazy; his friends thought he was a pussy; his teachers didn't want 
this leather-jacketed and leather-booted person on their courses. 
He and I studied together almost every night, trying to win back 
the seven years of education Chris had lost. We were hanging on to 
each other in deep water. 

We both graduated. Chris went to university to study law. 
Near the end of the spring term in 1968, Chris was queuing in a 
restaurant when two men in front of him started to argue about 
who was there first. Chris, who had always been the best of us 
at making peace, stepped between them and got a knife in his 
throat. He was dead in seconds. I wasn't there. Chris was in 
graduate school, and I had already graduated from university and 
was married. When I read about it in the newspaper I told my 
wife I was going out to get a drink. I drove out of town, parked 
and cried for him. I cried for nearly half an hour without stopping. 

Me? I'm a writer now. 

ACTIVITIES 

Chapters 1-7 

Before you read 

1 In this book, the writer remembers his life when he was twelve years 
old. What can you remember about being twelve? Who were your 
best friends? Do you still see them? Why, or why not? 

2 Find these words in your dictionary: 
backpack dump garbage hail tracks 
Which of them go in the following spaces? 
a Trains travel along 
b Travellers carry 
c The rubbish collectors took our 
to the 

d 
stones are frozen rain. 

3 Find these very informal words in your dictionary. 
guy puke pussy 
Which of them means 
a to be sick? 
b a person? 
c a cat? 

4 In this book, the boys use one of these words to mean coward. Which 
one, do you think? 

After you read 

5 Who are these sentences about? 
a He has a violent father. 
b His father is unemployed. 
c His father works in a factory 
d His parents are not interested in him. 
e They are not very intelligent. 

6 Why don't Charlie Hogan and Billy Tessio tell the police about the 
dead body? 

7 Work in pairs. Act out this conversation between Gordie and Chris. 
Student A: You axe Gordie. You don't want Chris to take his father's 

gun with him. Tell him why. 
Student B: You are Chris. You think the gun will be useful in the forest. 
Tell Gordie why 

Chapters 8-11 

Before you read 

8 What do the gang take with them on their journey? What else would 
you take? 

9 Find these words in your dictionary: 
ass 
worm 

Choose two of the following definitions for each word. 
a A low form of life that lives in the earth. 
b An informal American English word for part of the body. 
c An animal used for carrying things. 
d An insulting word for someone who is unimportant. 

After you read 
10 Choose the correct answer. 

a They feel happy at the dump because 
(i) the sun is shining. 
(ii) life seems uncomplicated. 
(ill) there is no sign of Milo or Chopper. 
b Teddy gets angry with Milo because 
(i) he insults his father. 
(ii) he is rude to him. 
(iii) he threatens to call the police. 
c After leaving the dump, the boys feel 
(i) thoughtful. 
(ii) eager to find the body. 
(iii) frightened. 

11 How does Gordie feel about these, and why? 
a Chris b Chopper c Milo d Teddy 

12 Chris and Gordie look in each other's eyes and see 'some of the true 
things that made us friends'. (page 18) What 'true things' do they see, 
do you think? What qualities do you think are important in a friend? 

Chapters 12-15 

Before you read 

13 The bridge across the Castle River is very dangerous. Will the boys 
cross it, do you think? Why, or why not? 

14 Find the word bog in your dictionary. Why is a bog dangerous to walk 
on? 

After you read 
15 Which of these sentences are true? Correct the false ones. 
a Vern is more afraid than Teddy of crossing the bridge. 
b Gordie can often see into the future. 
c Gordie is looking forward to the college courses. 
d The boys don't usually discuss their parents. 
e They eat the meat before it is properly cooked. 

16 Which boys cry, or almost cry, in these chapters? Why? 
17 What is Gordie's dream really about, do you think? 

Chapters 16-20 

Before you read 
18 How will the boys feel in the morning, do you think, after spending the 
night in the forest? Why? 

19 Find these words in your dictionary: 
deer leech 
Which of them a drinks blood? b eats leaves and plants? 

After you read 
20 Make correct sentences. 

a Vern 
is the first into the pool. 

b Teddy 
takes a leech out of his ear. 

c Gordie 
is unhappy about his breakfast. 

d Chris 
can't swim. 

21 Which two sentences about Gordie are true? Find the sentence in the 
story which tells you. 
a He thinks that life is more fun if you don't think too much. 
b He thinks that most people are only interested in the bad things in 

the life. 
c He thinks that people are happier if life is hard. 
d He thinks that things seem less important if they happen too easily. 

22 What does Gordie find most shocking about the boy's body? 

Chapters 21-27 

Before you read 
23 What will the boys do after finding the body, do you think? Why? 
24 Find the word cartridge in your dictionary. Think of three things that 
cartridges ate used for. 

After you read 
25 How are these things important to the story? 

a Gordie's brother 
b a gun 
c a bucket 

26 Who says the following things, and what do the underlined words 
mean? 
a 'If you go, we'll take him.' (page 59) 
b 'He's really going to hurt you for that.' (page 61) 
c 'Where do you want it, Ace?' (page 62) 
d 'We won't forget this.' (page 63) 
e 'We did it.'(page 63) 
f It's not fair, but it happens. (page 71) 

27 Why does Chris cry after Ace Merrill's gang have gone, do you think? 

Writing 

28 Teddy likes doing dangerous things. Write about the most dangerous 
thing that you've ever done. Why did you do it, and how did you feel 
afterwards? 

29 You are Milo Pressman. You have decided to report the boys. Write a 
letter to the police, describing what happened. 

30 You are Gordie. Write a description of Chris. Write about his good 
points and bad points, and say why you liked him. 

31 Write about the importance of one of these to the story. 
a the weather 
b adults 
c animals 

Answers for the activities in this book are available from your local 
Pearson Education office or contact: Penguin Readers Marketing Department, 
Pearson Education, Edinburgh Gate, Harlow, Essex, CM20 2JE, 

A STORY BY STEPHEN KING - THE MASTER 
OF HORROR. 

Gordie Lanchance and his three friends are always ready for 
adventure. W h e n they hear about a dead body in the forest 
they go to look for it. Then they discover how cruel the 
world can be. 

Penguin Readers are simplified texts designed in association with Longman, 
the world famous educational publisher, to provide a step-by-step approach 
to the joys of reading for pleasure. Each book has an introduction and 
extensive activity material. They are published at seven levels from 
Easystarts (200 words) to Advanced (3000 words). 

Series Editors: Andy Hopkins and Jocelyn Potter 

NEW EDITION 

6 Advanced (3000 words) 

5 Upper Intermediate (2300 words) 

4 Intermediate (1700 words) 

3 Pre-lntermediate (1200 words) 

2 Elementary (600 words) 

I Beginner (300 words) 

Easystarts (200 words) 

Contemporary 

Classics 

Originals 

British English 

American English. 

www.penguinreaders.com 

Front cover shows a film still from 'Stand By Me' reproduced by courtesy of Columbia Pictures 
© 1986 Columbia Pictures Industries Inc. (Photo: Kobal Collection) 

ISBN 0-582-41817-8 

Published and distributed by 
Pearson Education Limited 

