The Cider House Rules

John Irving

Dedication

For David Calicchio

Epigraph

Conventionality is not morality. Self-righteousness is not religion. To
attack the first is not to assail the last.

—CHARLOTTE BRONTË, 1847

 
For practical purposes abortion may be defined as the interruption of
gestation before the viability of the child.

—H. J. BOLDT, M.D., 1906

Contents

Cover
Title Page
Dedication
Epigraph
 
1 - The Boy Who Belonged to St. Cloud’s
2 - The Lord’s Work
3 - Princes of Maine, Kings of New England
4 - Young Dr. Wells
5 - Homer Breaks a Promise
6 - Ocean View
7 - Before the War
8 - Opportunity Knocks
9 - Over Burma
10 - Fifteen Years
11 - Breaking the Rules
 
Author’s Notes
 
P.S.: Insights, Interviews & More . . .
    About the author
    Read on
    Have you read?
 
Also by John Irving
Copyright
About the Publisher

The Boy Who Belonged to St. Cloud’s

In the hospital of the orphanage—the boys’ division at St. Cloud’s, Maine—
two nurses were in charge of naming the new babies and checking that their
little penises were healing from the obligatory circumcision. In those days (in
192_), all boys born at St. Cloud’s were circumcised because the orphanage
physician had experienced some difficulty in treating uncircumcised soldiers,
for this and for that, in World War I. The doctor, who was also the director of
the boys’ division, was not a religious man; circumcision was not a rite with
him—it was a strictly medical act, performed for hygienic reasons. His name
was Wilbur Larch, which, except for the scent of ether that always
accompanied him, reminded one of the nurses of the tough, durable wood of
the coniferous tree of that name. She hated, however, the ridiculous name of
Wilbur, and took offense at the silliness of combining a word like Wilbur with
something as substantial as a tree.

The other nurse imagined herself to be in love with Dr. Larch, and when it

was her turn to name a baby, she frequently named him John Larch, or John
Wilbur (her father’s name was John), or Wilbur Walsh (her mother’s maiden
name had been Walsh). Despite her love for Dr. Larch, she could not imagine
Larch as anything but a last name—and when she thought of him, she did not
think of trees at all. For its flexibility as a first or as a last name, she loved the
name of Wilbur—and when she tired of her use of John, or was criticized by
her colleague for overusing it, she could rarely come up with anything more
original than a Robert Larch or a Jack Wilbur (she seemed not to know that
Jack was often a nickname for John).

If he had been named by this dull, love-struck nurse, he probably would

have been a Larch or a Wilbur of one kind or another; and a John, a Jack, or a
Robert—to make matters even duller. Because it was the other nurse’s turn,
he was named Homer Wells.

The other nurse’s father was in the business of drilling wells, which was

hard, harrowing, honest, precise work—to her thinking her father was
composed of these qualities, which lent the word “wells” a certain deep,
down-to-earth aura. “Homer” had been the name of one of her family’s
umpteen cats.

names of her babies, whereas poor Nurse Edna had named three John Wilbur
Juniors, and two John Larch the Thirds. Nurse Angela knew an inexhaustible
number of no-nonsense nouns, which she diligently employed as last names—
Maple, Fields, Stone, Hill, Knot, Day, Waters (to list a few)—and a slightly
less impressive list of first names borrowed from a family history of many
dead but cherished pets (Felix, Fuzzy, Smoky, Sam, Snowy, Joe, Curly, Ed
and so forth).

For most of the orphans, of course, these nurse-given names were

temporary. The boys’ division had a better record than the girls’ division at
placing the orphans in homes when they were babies, too young ever to know
the names their good nurses had given them; most of the orphans wouldn’t
even remember Nurse Angela or Nurse Edna, the first women in the world to
fuss over them. Dr. Larch made it a firm policy that the orphans’ adoptive
families not be informed of the names the nurses gave with such zeal. The
feeling at St. Cloud’s was that a child, upon leaving the orphanage, should
know the thrill of a fresh start—but (especially with the boys who were
difficult to place and lived at St. Cloud’s the longest) it was hard for Nurse
Angela and Nurse Edna, and even for Dr. Larch, not to think of their John
Wilburs and John Larches (their Felix Hills, Curly Maples, Joe Knots, Smoky
Waterses) as possessing their nurse-given names forever.

The reason Homer Wells kept his name was that he came back to St. Cloud’s

so many times, after so many failed foster homes, that the orphanage was
forced to acknowledge Homer’s intention to make St. Cloud’s his home. It
was not easy for anyone to accept, but Nurse Angela and Nurse Edna—and,
finally, Dr. Wilbur Larch—were forced to admit that Homer Wells belonged
to St. Cloud’s. The determined boy was not put up for adoption anymore.

Wells that the boy must adore the name she gave him because he fought so
hard not to lose it.

St. Cloud’s, Maine—the town—had been a logging camp for most of the
nineteenth century. The camp, and—gradually—the town, set up shop in the
river valley, where the land was flat, which made the first roads easier to build
and the heavy equipment easier to transport. The first building was a saw mill.
The first settlers were French Canadians—woodsmen, lumberjacks, sawyers;

then came the overland haulers and the river bargemen, then the prostitutes,
then the vagrants and the thugs, and (at last) there was a church. The first
logging camp had been called, simply, Clouds—because the valley was low
and the clouds broke up reluctantly. A fog hung over the violent river until
midmorning, and the falls, which roared for three miles upstream from the
site of the first camp, produced a constant mist. When the first woodcutters
went to work there, the only impediments to their rape of the forest were the
black flies and the mosquitoes; these infernal insects preferred the nearly
constant cover of clouds in the stagnant valleys of inland Maine to the sharp
air of the mountains, or to the crisp sunlight by the bright Maine sea.

director of the boys’ division (he had also founded the place)—was the self-
appointed historian of the town. According to Dr. Larch, the logging camp
called Clouds became St. Clouds only because of “the fervent backwoods
Catholic instinct to put a Saint before so many things—as if to grant those
things a grace they could never quite acquire naturally.” The logging camp
remained St. Clouds for nearly half a century before the apostrophe was
inserted—probably by someone who was unaware of the camp’s origin. But
by the time it became St. Cloud’s, it was more of a mill town than a logging
camp. The forest, for miles around, was cleared; instead of logs jamming the
river, and the rough camp full of men lamed and crippled by falling from trees
or by trees falling on them, one saw the high, orderly stacks of fresh-cut
boards drying out in the hazy sun. Overall lay a silty sawdust occasionally too
fine to see, but ever-present in the sneezes and wheezes of the town, in the
town’s perpetually itching noses and in its rasping lungs. The town’s wounded
now sported stitches instead of bruises and broken bones; they wore gashes
(and found ways to flaunt their missing parts) from the mill’s many saws. The
keen whine of those blades was as constant in St. Cloud’s as the fog, the mist,
the humidity that overhangs inland Maine in the damp cold of its long, wet,
snowed-in winters and in the fetid, stifling heat of its drizzly summers—
blessed, only occasionally, by violent thunderstorms.

There was never any spring in that part of Maine, except that period of time

in March and April distinguished by thawing mud. The heavy equipment of
the lumbering business was immobilized; the work of the town shut down.
The impassable roads kept everyone at home—and the springtime river was
so swollen, and ran so fast, that no one dared to travel on it. Spring in St.
Cloud’s meant trouble: drinking trouble, brawling trouble, whoring and raping
trouble. Spring was the suicide season. In spring, the seeds for an orphanage
were planted and overplanted.

the business of the orphanage—Dr. Wilbur Larch wrote of the fall. Each of
Dr. Larch’s entries began, “Here in St. Cloud’s . . .”—except for those entries
that began, “In other parts of the world . . .” Of the fall, Dr. Larch wrote: “In
other parts of the world, fall is for the harvest; one gathers the fruits of spring
and summer’s labors. These fruits provide for the long slumber and the season
of ungrowing that is called winter. But here in St. Cloud’s, the fall is only five
minutes long.”

imagine resort weather? Would an orphanage bloom in an innocent town?

wrote in a small, cramped hand, on both sides of the pages, which were
absolutely filled. Dr. Larch was not a man for leaving margins. “Here in St.
Cloud’s,” he wrote, “guess who is the enemy of the Maine forests, the
villainous father of the unwanted babies, the reason the river is choked with
deadwood and the valley land stripped, unplanted, eroded by the river floods
—guess who is the insatiable destroyer (first of a logger with his hands pitchy
and his fingers mashed; then of a lumberman, a saw-mill slave whose hands
are dry and cracked, with some fingers only a memory), and guess why this
glutton is not satisfied with logs or with lumber . . . guess who.”

To Dr. Larch, the enemy was paper—specifically, the Ramses Paper

Company. There were enough trees for lumber, Dr. Larch imagined, but there
would never be enough trees for all the paper the Ramses Paper Company
seemed to want or to need—especially if one failed to plant new trees. When
the valley surrounding St. Cloud’s was cleared and the second growth (scrub
pine and random, unmanaged softwoods) sprang up everywhere, like swamp
weed, and when there were no more logs to send downriver, from Three Mile
Falls to St. Cloud’s—because there were no more trees—that was when the
Ramses Paper Company introduced Maine to the twentieth century by closing
down the saw mill and the lumberyard along the river at St. Cloud’s and
moving camp, downstream.

bank of the river (where the big log drives, jamming, had gouged out a raw,
new shore), and the buildings themselves: the mill with its broken windows
with no screens; the whore hotel with its dance hall downstairs and the bingo-
for-money room overlooking the rough river; the few private homes, log-
cabin style, and the church, which was Catholic, for the French Canadians,
and which looked too clean and unused to belong to St. Cloud’s, where it had
never been half as popular as the whores, or the dance hall, or even bingo-for-
money. (In Dr. Larch’s journal, he wrote: “In other parts of the world they
play tennis or poker, but here in St. Cloud’s they play bingo-for-money.”)

And the people who were left behind? There were no Ramses Paper

Company people left behind, but there were people: the older, and the less
attractive prostitutes, and the children of these prostitutes. Not one of the
neglected officers of the Catholic Church of St. Cloud’s stayed; there were
more souls to save by following the Ramses Paper Company downstream.

In his A Brief History of St. Cloud’s, Dr. Larch documented that at least one

of these prostitutes knew how to read and write. On the last barge downriver,
following the Ramses Paper Company to a new civilization, a relatively
literate prostitute sent a letter addressed to: WHICHEVER OFFICIAL OF
THE STATE OF MAINE WHO IS CONCERNED WITH ORPHANS!

Somehow, this letter actually reached someone. Forwarded many times (“for

its curiosity,” Dr. Larch wrote, “as much as for its urgency”), the letter was
delivered to the state board of medical examiners. The youngest member of
this board—“a puppy, right out of medical school,” as Dr. Larch described
himself—was shown the prostitute’s letter as a kind of bait. The rest of the
board thought that young Larch was “the one hopelessly naïve Democrat and
liberal” among them. The letter said: THERE SHOULD BE A
GODDAMNED DOCTOR, AND A GODDAMNED SCHOOL, AND EVEN
A GODDAMNED POLICEMAN AND A GODDAMNED LAWYER IN ST.
CLOUD’S, WHICH HAS BEEN DESERTED BY ITS GODDAMN MEN
(WHO WERE NEVER MUCH) AND LEFT TO HELPLESS WOMEN AND
ORPHANS!

The chairman of the state board of medical examiners was a retired

physician who thought that President Teddy Roosevelt was the only other
man in the world besides himself who had not been made from a banana.

knowing that out of this invitation a state-supported facility—for orphans!—
would soon develop. It would one day gain at least partial federal support, and
even that most vague and least dependable support offered by “private
benefactors.”

blossomed (even in inland Maine), Dr. Wilbur Larch undertook the task of
righting the wrongs of St. Cloud’s. He had his work cut out for him. For
almost twenty years, Dr. Larch would leave St. Cloud’s only once—for World
War I, where it is doubtful he was more needed. What better man could be
imagined for the job of undoing what the Ramses Paper Company had done
than a man named after one of the world’s coniferous trees? In his journal—as
he was only beginning—Dr. Larch wrote: “Here in St. Cloud’s it is high time
something was done for the good of someone. What better place for
improvement could there be—for self-improvement, and for the good of all—

than a place where evil has so clearly flourished if not altogether triumphed?”

was named, Nurse Edna (who was in love) and Nurse Angela (who wasn’t)
had in common a pet name of their own for St. Cloud’s founder, physician,
town historian, war hero (he was even decorated), and director of the boys’
division.

“Saint Larch,” they called him—and why not?
When Wilbur Larch granted Homer Wells permission to remain at St.

Cloud’s for as long as the boy felt he belonged there, the doctor was merely
exercising his considerable, and earned, authority. On the issue of belonging
to St. Cloud’s, Dr. Larch was an authority. St. Larch had found his place—in
the twentieth century—to be, as he put it, “of use.” And that is precisely how
Dr. Larch instructed Homer Wells, when the doctor sternly accepted the boy’s
need to stay at St. Cloud’s.

“Well, then, Homer,” said St. Larch, “I expect you to be of use.”

He was nothing (Homer Wells) if not of use. His sense of usefulness appears
to predate Dr. Larch’s instructions. His first foster parents returned him to St.
Cloud’s; they thought there was something wrong with him—he never cried.
The foster parents complained that they would wake to the same silence that
had prompted them to adopt a child in the first place. They’d wake up
alarmed that the baby hadn’t woken them, they’d rush into the baby’s room,
expecting to find him dead, but Homer Wells would be toothlessly biting his
lip, perhaps grimacing, but not protesting that he was unfed and unattended.
Homer’s foster parents always suspected that he’d been awake, quietly
suffering, for hours. They thought this wasn’t normal.

Dr. Larch explained to them that the babies of St. Cloud’s were used to lying

in their beds unattended. Nurse Angela and Nurse Edna, dearly devoted
though they were, could not be rushing to each and every baby the second it
cried; crying was not of much use at St. Cloud’s (though in his heart of hearts
Dr. Larch knew very well that Homer’s capacity for withholding tears was
unusual even for an orphan).

It was Dr. Larch’s experience that foster parents who could so easily be

deterred from wanting a baby were not the best parents for an orphan.
Homer’s first foster parents were so quick to assume they’d been given a
wrong one—retarded, a lemon, brain-damaged—that Dr. Larch didn’t extend
himself to assure them that Homer was a very fit baby, bound to have a
courageous long haul in the life ahead.

His second foster family responded differently to Homer’s lack of sound—

his stiff-upper-lip and bite-the-bullet-while-just-lying-there placidity. His

second foster family beat the baby so regularly that they managed to get some
appropriately babylike noise out of him. Homer’s crying saved him.

If he’d proven himself to be stalwart at resisting tears, now when he saw that

tears and howls and shrieks seemed to be what his foster family most desired
of him, he tried to be of use and gave, with his whole heart, the lustiest wails
he could deliver. He had been such a creature of contentment, Dr. Larch was
surprised to learn that the new baby from St. Cloud’s was disturbing the peace
in the fortunately small and nearby town of Three Mile Falls. It’s fortunate
that Three Mile Falls was small, because the stories of Homer’s cries were the
center of the area’s gossip for several weeks; and it’s fortunate that Three
Mile Falls was nearby, because the stories found their way to St. Cloud’s and
to Nurse Angela and Nurse Edna, who had cornered the gossip market in all
those river, wood, and paper towns. When they heard the tales of how their
Homer Wells was keeping Three Mile Falls awake until the small hours, and
how he would wake up the town before it was light, the nurses’ good
memories did not forsake them; they went straight to St. Larch.

“That’s not my Homer!” Nurse Angela cried.
“He’s not a natural at crying, Wilbur,” Nurse Edna said—taking every

opportunity she had to pronounce that name so dear to her heart: Wilbur! It
always made Nurse Angela cross with her (whenever Nurse Edna indulged
her desire to call Dr. Larch a Wilbur to his face).

“if Homer Wells is waking up Three Mile Falls, that family you let have him
must be burning that boy with their cigarettes.”

They weren’t that kind of family. That was a favorite fantasy of Nurse

Angela’s—she hated smoking; just the look of a cigarette dangling from
anyone’s mouth made her remember a French-speaking Indian who’d come to
see her father about digging a well and had stuck his cigarette in one of her
cat’s faces, burning its nose!—the cat, an especially friendly spayed female,
had jumped up in the Indian’s lap. That cat had been named Bandit—she’d
had the classic masked face of a raccoon. Nurse Angela had restrained herself
from naming any of the orphans after Bandit—she thought of Bandit as a
girl’s name.

An older man and his younger wife lived with his grown-up children of a
previous marriage; the young wife wanted a child of her own, but she
couldn’t get pregnant. Everyone in the family thought it would be nice for the
young wife to have her own baby. What no one mentioned was that one of the
grown-up children from the previous marriage had had a baby, illegitimately,
and she hadn’t cared for it very well, and the baby had cried and cried and

cried. Everyone complained about the baby crying, night and day, and one
morning the grown-up daughter had simply taken her baby and gone. She left
only this note behind:

I’M SICK OF HEARING FROM ALL OF YOU ABOUT HOW MUCH MY BABY CRIES. I
GUESS IF I GO YOU WON’T MISS THE CRYING OR ME EITHER.

But they did miss the crying—everyone missed that wonderful, bawling

baby and the dear, dim-witted daughter who had taken it away.

“Be sure nice to have a baby crying around here again,” someone in the

family had remarked, and so they went and got themselves a baby from St.
Cloud’s.

They were the wrong family to be given a baby who wouldn’t cry. Homer’s

silence was such a disappointment to them that they took it as a kind of
affront and challenged each other to discover who among them could make
the baby cry first; after first they progressed to loudest, after loudest came
longest.

They first made him cry by not feeding him, but they made him cry loudest

by hurting him; this usually meant pinching him or punching him, but there
was ample evidence that the baby had been bitten, too. They made him cry
longest by frightening him; they discovered that startling babies was the best
way to frighten them. They must have been very accomplished at achieving
the loudest and longest in order to have made Homer Wells’s crying a legend
in Three Mile Falls. It was especially hard to hear anything in Three Mile
Falls—not to mention how hard it was to make a legend out of anything there.

The falls themselves made such a steady roar that Three Mile Falls was the

perfect town for murder; no one there could hear a shot or a scream. If you
murdered someone in Three Mile Falls and threw the body in the river at the
falls, the body couldn’t possibly be stopped (or even slowed down, not to
mention found) until it went three miles downriver to St. Cloud’s. It was
therefore all the more remarkable that the whole town heard the kind of
crying Homer Wells made.

It took Nurse Angela and Nurse Edna about a year before Homer Wells

stopped waking up with a scream or letting out a wail whenever someone
crossed his field of vision, or whenever he heard a human sound, even a chair
being dragged across the floor, or even a bed creak, a window shut, a door
open. Every sight and sound connected with a human being who might
possibly be headed in Homer’s direction produced a high, stammering shout
and such tearful blubbering that anyone visiting the boys’ division would have
thought that the orphanage was, in fairy-tale fashion, a torture shop, a prison
of child molestation and abuse beyond imagining.

scarlet and refilled his lungs. “Homer, you’re going to get us investigated for
murder! You’re going to get us shut down.”

scarred by the family from Three Mile Falls than Homer Wells was, and the
good and the great St. Larch never fully recovered from the incident. He had
met the family; he’d interviewed them all—and been horribly wrong about
them; and he’d seen them all again on the day he went to Three Mile Falls to
bring Homer Wells back to St. Cloud’s.

What Dr. Larch would always remember was the fright in all of their

expressions when he’d marched into their house and taken Homer up in his
arms. The fear in their faces would haunt Dr. Larch forever, the epitome of
everything he could never understand about the great ambiguity in the
feelings people had for children. There was the human body, which was so
clearly designed to want babies—and then there was the human mind, which
was so confused about the matter. Sometimes the mind didn’t want the babies,
but sometimes the mind was so perverse that it made other people have babies
they knew they didn’t want. For whom was this insisting done? Dr. Larch
wondered. For whom did some minds insist that babies, even clearly
unwanted ones, must be brought, screaming, into the world?

wouldn’t) take proper care of them . . . well, what were these minds thinking?
When Dr. Larch’s mind ran away with him on the subject, it was always the
fear in those faces of the family from Three Mile Falls that he saw, and
Homer Wells’s legendary howl that he heard. The fear in that family was
fixed in St. Larch’s vision; no one, he believed, who had seen such fear
should ever make a woman have a baby she didn’t want to have. “NO ONE!”
Dr. Larch wrote in his journal. “Not even someone from the Ramses Paper
Company!”

Wilbur Larch—or you would suffer every detail there was to know about the
six weeks Homer Wells spent with the family from Three Mile Falls. This was
Larch’s only way of discussing the issue (which was not even open to debate
with him). He was an obstetrician, but when he was asked—and when it was
safe—he was an abortionist, too.

By the time Homer was four he didn’t have those dreams anymore—the

ones that could awaken every living soul in St. Cloud’s, the dreams that
caused one night watchman to resign (“My heart,” he said, “won’t take
another night of that boy”) and that resided so soundly in the memory of Dr.
Wilbur Larch that he was known, for years, to hear babies crying in his sleep

and to roll over saying, “Homer, Homer, it’s all right now, Homer.”

At St. Cloud’s, of course, babies were always crying in everyone’s sleep, but

no baby ever woke up crying in quite the manner that Homer Wells managed
it.

“Lord, it’s as if he was being stabbed,” Nurse Edna would say.
“As if he was being burned with a cigarette,” Nurse Angela would say.
But only Wilbur Larch knew what it was really like—that way that Homer

Wells woke up and (in his violent waking) woke everyone else. “As if he
were being circumcised,” Dr. Larch wrote in his journal. “As if someone were
snipping his little penis—over and over again, just snipping it and snipping
it.”

The third foster family to fail with Homer Wells was a family of such rare and
championship qualities that to judge humanity by this family’s example
would be foolish. They were that good a family. They were that perfect, or Dr.
Larch would not have let Homer go to them. After the family from Three
Mile Falls, Dr. Larch was being especially careful with Homer.

Professor Draper and his wife of nearly forty years lived in Waterville,

Maine. Waterville was not much of a college town in 193_, when Homer
Wells went there; but if you compared Waterville to St. Cloud’s, or to Three
Mile Falls, you would have to say that Waterville was a community of moral
and social giants. Though still inland, it was of considerably higher elevation
—there were nearby mountains, and from these there were actual vistas;
mountain life (like the life on an ocean, or on the plains, or on open farmland)
affords the inhabitant the luxury of a view. Living on land where you can
occasionally see a long way provides the soul with a perspective of a
beneficially expansive nature—or so believed Professor Draper; he was a
born teacher.

“Unfarmed valley land,” he would intone, “which I associate with forests

too low and too dense to provide a view, tends to cramp the uplifting qualities
of human nature and enhance those instincts which are mean-spirited and
small.”

“Now, Homer,” Mrs. Draper would say. “The professor is a born teacher.

You have to take him with a grain of salt.”

Everyone called her Mom. No one (including his grown children and his

grandchildren) called him anything but Professor. Even Dr. Larch didn’t know
what his first name was. If his tone was professorial, at times even officious,
he was a man of very regular habits and temperament, and his manner was
jocular.

“Wet shoes,” the professor once said to Homer, “are a fact of Maine. They

are a given. Your method, Homer, of putting wet shoes on a windowsill where
they might be dried by the faint appearance, albeit rare, of the Maine sun, is
admirable for its positivism, its determined optimism. However,” the
professor would go on, “a method I would recommend for wet shoes—a
method, I must add, that is independent of the weather—involves a more
reliable source of heat in Maine: namely, the furnace. When you consider that
the days when shoes get wet are days, as a rule, when we don’t see the sun,
you’ll recognize the furnace-room method as having certain advantages.”

professor called her Mom; even Mom called him Professor.

If Homer Wells found the professor’s conversation abounding in pithy

maxims, he didn’t complain. If Professor Draper’s students at the college and
his colleagues in the history department thought that the professor was a
sententious bore—and tended to flee his path like rabbits escaping the slow
but nose-to-the-ground hound—they could not influence Homer’s opinion of
the first father figure in his life to rival Dr. Larch.

had never known. Nurse Angela and Nurse Edna were emergency providers,
and Dr. Larch an affectionate, if stern and distracted, overseer. But Mrs.
Draper was a mom’s mom; she was a hoverer. She was up before Homer was
awake; the cookies she baked while he ate his breakfast were miraculously
still warm in his lunch bag at noon. Mom Draper hiked to school with Homer
—they went overland, disdaining the road; it was her “constitutional,” she
said.

school’s end seemed magically timed to coincide with the professor’s last
class of the day at the college—and they would tramp home together. In the
winter, which in Waterville came early, this was a literal tramping—on
snowshoes, the mastery of which the professor placed on a level of learning to
read and write.

“Use the body, use the mind, Homer,” the professor said.
It’s easy to see why Wilbur Larch was impressed with the man. He

vigorously represented usefulness.

predictability of it. An orphan is simply more of a child than other children in
that essential appreciation of the things that happen daily, on schedule. For
everything that promises to last, to stay the same, the orphan is a sucker.

Dr. Larch ran the boys’ division with as many of the simulated

manifestations of daily life as are possible to cultivate at an orphanage. Meals
were promptly served at the same time, every day. Dr. Larch would read

aloud at the same evening hour for the same length of time, even if it meant
leaving a chapter in midadventure, with the boys shouting, “More, more, just
read the next thing that happens!”

be groans of disappointment, but Larch knew that he had made a promise; he
had established a routine. “Here in St. Cloud’s,” he wrote in his journal,
“security is measured by the number of promises kept. Every child
understands a promise—if it is kept—and looks forward to the next promise.
Among orphans, you build security slowly but regularly.”

Drapers in Waterville. Every activity was a lesson; each corner of the
comfortable old house held something to be learned and then counted upon.

to the dog. “This is Rufus’s rug, this is his kingdom. When Rufus is sleeping
on his kingdom, do not wake him—unless you are prepared for him to snap.”
Whereupon the professor would rouse the ancient dog, who would snap
awake—and then appear to puzzle over the air he had bitten, tasting in it the
Drapers’ grown-up children, now married and with children of their own.

an experience in family guaranteed to make other families feel inferior. Mom
would outdo herself at momness. The professor had a lecture ready on every
conceivable subject: the qualities of white meat, and of dark; the last election;
the pretension of salad forks; the superiority of the nineteenth-century novel
(not to mention other aspects of that century’s superiority); the proper texture
of cranberry sauce; the meaning of “repentance”; the wholesomeness of
exercise (including a comparison between splitting wood and ice skating); the
evil inherent in naps. To each laboriously expressed opinion of the
professor’s, his grown children (two married women, one married man)
would respond with a fairly balanced mixture of:

“Just so!”
“Isn’t that always the way?”
“Right again, Professor!”
These robotlike responses were punctuated, with equal precision, by Mom’s

oft-repeated, “Grain of salt, grain of salt.”

world trying to decipher a strange tribe’s drums. He couldn’t quite catch on.
The seeming constancy of everyone was overwhelming. He wouldn’t know
until he was much older just which it was that didn’t set well with him—the
implicit (and explicit) and self-congratulatory do-gooderism, or the heartiness
with which life was tediously oversimplified.

was looking for that led to himself—to who he was, or should be. He
remembered various Thanksgivings at St. Cloud’s. They were not so cheery
as the Waterville Thanksgiving with the Draper family, but they seemed a lot
more real. He remembered how he had felt of use. There were always babies
who couldn’t feed themselves. There was the likelihood of a snowstorm that
would knock out the electricity; Homer was put in charge of the candles and
the kerosene lamps. He was also in charge of helping the kitchen staff clear,
of helping Nurse Angela and Nurse Edna comfort the crying—of being Dr.
Larch’s messenger: the most prized responsibility that was conferred in the
boys’ division. Before he was ten, and long before he would be given such
explicit instruction from Dr. Larch, Homer felt full of usefulness at St.
Cloud’s.

What was it about Thanksgiving at the Drapers’ that contrasted so severely

with the same event at St. Cloud’s? Mom had no match as a cook; it couldn’t
have been the food—which, at St. Cloud’s, suffered from a visible and
seemingly terminal grayness. Was it the saying of grace? At St. Cloud’s, grace
was a rather blunt instrument—Dr. Larch not being a religious man.

wondering, What for? “Let us be thankful for what kindness we have
received,” Larch would say, cautiously looking at the unwanted and
abandoned around him. “Let us be thankful for Nurse Angela and for Nurse
Edna,” he would add, with more assurance in his voice. “Let us be thankful
that we’ve got options, that we’ve got second chances,” he added once,
looking at Homer Wells.

chance, with understandable caution, with typically Larchlike reserve.

Grace at the Drapers’ was effusive and strange. It seemed somehow

connected with the professor’s definition of the meaning of “repentance.”
Professor Draper said that the start of real repentance was to accept yourself
as vile. For grace, the professor cried out, “Say after me: I am vile, I abhor
myself, but I am thankful for everyone in my family!” They all said so—even
Homer, even Mom (who for once withheld her recommended grain of salt).

St. Cloud’s was a sober place, but its manner of giving what little thanks it

could seemed frank, sincere. Some contradiction in the Draper family
occurred to Homer Wells for the first time at Thanksgiving. Unlike St.
Cloud’s, life in Waterville seemed good—babies, for example, were wanted.
Where did “repentance” come from, then? Was there guilt attached to feeling
lucky? And if Larch (as Homer had been told) was named from a tree, God
(whom Homer heard a lot about in Waterville) seemed to be named from even

tougher stuff: maybe from mountain, maybe from ice. If God was sobering in
Waterville, the Draper Thanksgiving was—to Homer’s surprise—a drunken
occasion.

meant that the professor had consumed more than his normal, daily amount of
alcohol—which, in Mom’s words, made him only “tipsy.” Homer was
shocked to see the two married daughters and the married son behave as if
they were in their cups, too. And since Thanksgiving was special and he was
allowed to stay up late—with all the grandchildren—Homer observed that
nightly occurrence he had previously only heard as he was falling asleep: the
thudding, dragging, shuffling sound, and the muffled voice of reason, which
was the professor slurring his protest of the fact that Mom forcibly assisted
him upstairs and with astonishing strength lifted him to and deposited him
upon the bed.

from the green chaise and collapsing upon the rug—beside old Rufus—as if
he’d been poisoned.

daughter, Homer noted, had nothing to say. She slept peacefully in the rocking
chair; her whole hand—above the second knuckle joints—was submerged in
her nearly full drink, which rested precariously in her lap.

The unmanaged grandchildren violated the house’s million rules. The

professor’s passionate readings of various riot acts were seemingly ignored
for Thanksgiving.

Homer Wells, not yet ten, crept quietly to his bed. Invoking an especially

sad memory of St. Cloud’s was a way he frequently forced sleep upon
himself. What he remembered was the time he saw the mothers leaving the
orphanage hospital, which was within view of the girls’ division and which
adjoined the boys’ division—they were architecturally linked by a long shed,
formerly a storage room for spare blades to the circular saw. It was early
morning, but it was still dark out and Homer needed the coach lights in order
to see that it was snowing. He slept badly and was often awake for the arrival
of the coach, which came from the railroad station and delivered to St.
Cloud’s the kitchen and cleaning staff and the first hospital shift. The coach
was simply an abandoned railroad car; set on sled runners in the winter, it was
a converted sleigh, pulled by horses. When there wasn’t enough snow on the
dirt road, the sled runners struck sparks against the stones in the ground and
made a terrible grating noise (they were reluctant to change the runners for
wheels until they knew the winter was over). A bright light, like a flare,
sputtered by the heavily blanketed driver on the makeshift carriage seat; softer

lights winked inside the coach car.

picked up by the coach. Homer Wells didn’t recognize the women, who
fidgeted the whole time it took the St. Cloud’s staff to unload. There seemed
to be a certain tension between these groups—the women waiting to board
appeared shy, even ashamed; the men and women coming to work seemed, by
comparison, arrogant, even superior, and one of them (it was a woman) made
a rough remark to the women waiting to leave. Homer couldn’t hear the
remark, but its effect drove the waiting women away from the coach like a
blast of the winter wind. The women who boarded the coach did not look
back, or even at each other. They didn’t even speak, and the driver, who
struck Homer as a friendly man who had something to say to nearly everyone
in any weather, had no words for them. The coach simply turned around and
glided across the snow to the station; in the lit windows, Homer Wells could
see that several of the women had their faces in their hands, or sat as stonily
as the other kind of mourner at a funeral—the one who must assume an
attitude of total disinterest or else risk total loss of control.

Cloud’s and then left them there, and he didn’t see them very clearly this time.
It was unquestionably more meaningful that he first saw them as they were
taking their leave rather than arriving, full-bellied and undelivered of their
problems. Importantly, Homer knew they did not look delivered of all their
problems when they left. No one he had seen looked more miserable than
those women; he suspected it was no accident that they left in darkness.

When he tried to put himself to sleep, Thanksgiving night with the Drapers

in Waterville, Homer Wells saw the mothers leaving in the snow, but he also
saw more than he’d actually seen. On the nights he couldn’t sleep, Homer
rode in the coach to the station with the women, he boarded the train with
them, he went to their homes with them; he singled out his mother and
followed her. It was hard to see what she looked like and where she lived,
where she’d come from, if she’d gone back there—and harder still was to
imagine who his father was, and if she went back to him. Like most orphans,
Homer Wells imagined that he saw his missing parents often, but he was
always unrecognized by them. As a child he was embarrassed to be caught
staring at adults, sometimes affectionately, other times with an instinctual
hostility he would not have recognized on his own face.

“You stop it, Homer,” Dr. Larch used to say to him at those times. “You just

cut it out.”

As an adult, Homer Wells would still get caught staring.
But on Thanksgiving night in Waterville, he stared so hard into his real

parents’ lives that he almost found them before he fell asleep, exhausted. He
was abruptly awakened by one of the grandchildren, an older boy; Homer had
forgotten he was going to share his bed with him because the house was
crowded.

pajamas,” the boy told Homer, who had no intention of taking it out. “You
know what buggering is?” the boy asked, then.

“No,” Homer said.
“Yes, you do, Pecker Head,” the boy said. “That’s what you all do at Saint

Cloud’s. You bugger yourselves. All the time. I’m telling you, you try to
bugger me and you’ll go back there without your pecker,” the boy said. “I’ll
cut off your pecker and feed it to the dog.”

“You mean Rufus?” Homer Wells asked.
“That’s right, Pecker Head,” the boy said. “You want to tell me again you

don’t know what buggering is?”

“I don’t know,” Homer said.
“You want me to show you, don’t you?” the boy asked.
“I don’t think so,” Homer said.
“Yes you do, Pecker Head,” the boy said, and he then tried to bugger Homer

Wells. Homer had never seen or heard of anyone being so abused at St.
Cloud’s. Although the older boy had learned his style of buggery at a private
school—a very good one—he had never been educated in the kind of crying
that Homer Wells had been taught by the family from Three Mile Falls. It
seemed to Homer that it was a good time for crying, loudly—if one wanted to
escape the buggery—and his crying immediately awakened the one adult in
the Draper household who had merely gone to sleep (as opposed to passing
out). In other words, Homer woke Mom. He woke all the grandchildren, too,
and since several of them were younger than Homer, and all of them had no
knowledge of Homer’s capacity for howls, his crying produced sheer terror
among them—and even aroused Rufus, who snapped.

“What in Heaven’s name?” Mom asked, at Homer’s door.
“He tried to bugger me, so I let him have it,” said the private school boy.

Homer, who was struggling to get his legendary howls under control—to send
them back to history—didn’t know that grandchildren are believed before
orphans.

“Here in St. Cloud’s,” wrote Dr. Larch, “it is self-defeating and cruel to give

much thought to ancestors. In other parts of the world, I’m sorry to say, an
orphan’s ancestors are always under suspicion.”

the remainder of the night; it was at least warm and dry there, and there was a
fold-out cot, which in the summers was used for camping trips.

Some of the wet socks were almost dry, and fit him. And the assortment of
wet snowsuits and hardy tramping clothes gave Homer an adequate selection.
He dressed himself in warm, outdoor clothes, which were—for the most part
—nearly dry. He knew that Mom and the professor thought too highly of
family ever to send him back to St. Cloud’s over a mere buggery; if he wanted
to go back, and he did, he’d have to leave on his own initiative.

would be treated and, doubtlessly, cured. She’d made him kneel before the
fold-out cot in the furnace room.

grace. “ ‘I am vile, I abhor myself,’ ” Mom said, and Homer had said it after
her—knowing that every word was untrue. He’d never liked himself so much.
He felt he was on the track to finding out who he was, and how he could be of
use, but he knew that the path led back to St. Cloud’s.

When Mom kissed him good night, she said, “Now, Homer, don’t mind

what the professor has to say about this. Whatever he says, you just take it
with a grain of salt.”

Homer Wells didn’t wait to hear the text of the professor’s lesson regarding

buggery. Homer stepped outside; even the snow didn’t stop him. In
Waterville, in 193_, it was no surprise to see so much snow on the ground for
Thanksgiving; and Professor Draper had very carefully instructed Homer on
the merits and methods of snowshoeing.

bigger road after that. It was daylight when the first truck stopped; it was a
logging truck. This seemed, to Homer, appropriate to where he was going. “I
belong to Saint Cloud’s,” he told the driver. “I got lost.” In 193_ every logger
knew where St. Cloud’s was; this driver knew it was in the other direction.

look for a truck going the other way. What are you, from Saint Cloud’s?” the
driver asked. Like most people, he assumed that orphans were always running
away from the orphanage—not running to it.

“I just belong there,” Homer Wells said, and the driver waved good-bye. In

Dr. Larch’s opinion, this driver—in order to be so insensitive as to let a boy
go off alone in the snow—simply had to be an employee of the Ramses Paper
Company.

the way.

Cloud’s.

“No,” Homer said. “I just belong there—for now.”
In 193_, it took a long time to drive anywhere in Maine, especially with

snow on the roads. It was growing dark when Homer Wells returned to his
home. The quality of the light was the same as the early morning when he’d
seen the mothers leaving their babies behind. Homer stood at the hospital
entrance for a while and watched the snow fall. Then he went and stood at the
entrance to the boys’ division. Then he went back and stood outside the
hospital entrance, because there was better light there.

from the railroad station—that unmerry sleigh—stopped at the hospital
entrance and let out a single passenger. She was so pregnant that the driver at
first appeared concerned she might slip and fall; then the driver appeared to
realize why the woman had come here, and it must have struck him as
immoral that he should actually help a woman like that through the snow. He
drove off and left her making her careful way toward the entrance, and toward
Homer Wells. Homer rang the bell at the entrance for the woman, who didn’t
seem to know what to do. It occurred to him that she was hoping for a little
time to think of what she too wanted to say to Dr. Larch.

that kind of familiarity in the way that they looked at each other, and in the
clear recognition between them—they knew perfectly well what the other was
up to. Homer was worried what Dr. Larch would say to him, but he realized
that the woman was more worried than he was—the woman didn’t know Dr.
Larch; she had no idea what sort of place St. Cloud’s was.

of Nurse Angela coming to open the door. For some reason, he reached out
and took the pregnant woman’s hand. Maybe it was the tear frozen to her face
that the new light had allowed him to see, but he wanted a hand to hold
himself. He was calm—Homer Wells—as Nurse Angela peered into the
snowy night in disbelief while she struggled to open the frozen door. To the
pregnant woman, and to her unwanted child, Homer said, “Don’t worry.
Everyone is nice here.”

“Mother!” was strangely on his lips when Nurse Angela finally got the door
open and seized Homer Wells in her arms.

“Oh, oh!” she cried. “Oh, Homer—my Homer, our Homer! I knew you’d be

back!”

neither one of them felt able to let go—Nurse Angela turned and included the
woman in her embrace. It seemed to Nurse Angela that this pregnant woman
was just another orphan who belonged (like Homer Wells) exactly where she
was.

What he told Dr. Larch was that he’d felt of no use in Waterville. Because of
what the Drapers had said, when they’d called Larch to say that Homer had
run away, Homer had to explain about the buggery—afterward, St. Larch
explained all about buggery to Homer. The professor’s drinking surprised Dr.
Larch (he was good, as a rule, at detecting that), and the prayers baffled
Larch. Dr. Larch’s note to the Drapers was of a brevity the professor’s own
language rarely allowed.

“Repent,” the note said. Larch might have left it at that, but he couldn’t

resist adding, “You are vile, you should abhor yourselves.”

Wilbur Larch knew that a fourth foster family for Homer Wells would not be

easy to find. The search took Dr. Larch three years, by which time Homer was
twelve—almost thirteen. Larch knew what the danger would be: it would take
Homer a great many years to feel as comfortable anywhere else as he felt at
St. Cloud’s.

“Here in St. Cloud’s,” Larch wrote in his journal, “we have only one

problem. That there will always be orphans is not in the category of a
problem; that is simply not to be solved—one does the best one can with that,
one takes care of them. That our budget will always be too small is also not a
problem; that won’t be solved, either—an orphanage goes down to the wire;
by definition, that is what should happen. And it is not a problem that every
woman who gets pregnant doesn’t necessarily want her baby; perhaps we can
look ahead to a more enlightened time, when women will have the right to
abort the birth of an unwanted child—but some women will always be
uneducated, will always be confused, will always be frightened. Even in
enlightened times, unwanted babies will manage to be born.

“And there will always be babies, who were very much wanted, who will

end up orphans—by accident, by both planned and random acts of violence,
which are not problems either. Here in St. Cloud’s we would waste our
limited energy and our limited imagination by regarding the sordid facts of
life as if they were problems. Here in St. Cloud’s we have only one problem.
His name is Homer Wells. We have been very successful with Homer. We
have managed to make the orphanage his home, and that is the problem. If
you try to give an institution of the state, or of any government, anything like
the love one is meant to invest in a family—and if the institution is an

orphanage and you succeed in giving it love—then you will create a monster:
an orphanage that is not a way-station to a better life, but an orphanage that is
the first and last stop, and the only station the orphan will accept.

“There is no excuse for cruelty, but—at an orphanage—perhaps we are

obliged to withhold love; if you fail to withhold love at an orphanage, you
will create an orphanage that no orphan will willingly leave. You will create a
Homer Wells—a true orphan, because his only home will always be at St.
Cloud’s. God (or whoever) forgive me. I have made an orphan; his name is
Homer Wells and he will belong to St. Cloud’s forever.”

stoves and its wood boxes, its fuse boxes, its linen closets, its laundry room,
its kitchen, its corners where the cats slept—when the mail came, who got
any, everyone’s name, who was on what shift; where the mothers went to be
shaved when they arrived, how long the mothers stayed, when—and with
what necessary assistance—they left. He knew the bells; in fact, he rang them.
He knew who the tutors were; he could recognize their style of walking from
the train station, when they were still two hundred yards away. He was even
known at the girls’ division, although the very few girls older than he was
frightened him and he spent as little time there as he could—going only on
errands for Dr. Larch: messages and delivering medicines. The director of the
girls’ division was not a doctor, so when the girls were sick, either they visited
Dr. Larch at the hospital or Larch went to the girls’ division to visit them. The
director of the girls’ division was Boston Irish and had worked for a while at
The New England Home for Little Wanderers. Her name was Mrs. Grogan,
although she never mentioned Mr. Grogan, and no one seeing her would have
an easy time imagining that there had ever been a man in her life. She may
have preferred the sound of Missus to the sound of Miss. At The New
England Home for Little Wanderers she had belonged to a society called
God’s Little Servants, which had given Dr. Larch pause. But Mrs. Grogan
showed no signs of seeking members for such a society in St. Cloud’s;
perhaps she was too busy—in addition to her duties as director of the girls’
division, she was responsible for arranging what little education was available
for the orphans.

If there was an orphan who remained at St. Cloud’s past the sixth grade level

of school, there was no school to go to—and the only school for grades one
through six was in Three Mile Falls; this was only a one-station stop on the
train from St. Cloud’s, but in 193_ the trains were often delayed, and the
Thursday engineer was notorious for forgetting to stop at the St. Cloud’s
station (as if the sight of so many abandoned buildings convinced him that St.
Cloud’s was still a ghost town, or perhaps he disapproved of the women who

got off the train there).

thought themselves superior to the occasional orphans in attendance; this
feeling prevailed the most strongly among those students who came from
families where they were neglected or abused, or both, and thus grades one
through six, for Homer Wells, were comprised of experiences more combative
than educational. He missed three Thursdays out of four, for years, and at
least one other day (every week) because of a late train; in the winters, he
missed a day a week because he was sick. And when there was too much
snow, the trains didn’t run.

The three tutors suffered the same perils pressed upon train service in those

years, because they all came to St. Cloud’s from Three Mile Falls. There was
a woman who taught math; she was a bookkeeper for a textile mill—“a real-
life accountant,” Nurse Edna claimed—but she refused to have anything to do
with algebra or geometry, and she firmly preferred addition and subtraction to
multiplication and division (Homer Wells would be a grown man before Dr.
Larch would discover that the boy had never learned the multiplication table).

Another woman, a well-to-do plumber’s widow, taught grammar and

spelling. Her method was rigorous and messy. She presented great clumps of
uncapitalized, misspelled, and unpunctuated words, and demanded that the
clumps be put into proper sentences, meticulously punctuated and correctly
spelled. She then corrected the corrections; the final document—she
employed a system of different-colored inks—resembled a much-revised
treaty between two semiliterate countries at war. The text itself was always
strange to Homer Wells, even when it was finally correct. This was because
the woman borrowed heavily from a family hymnal, and Homer Wells had
never seen a church or heard a hymn (unless one counted Christmas carols, or
the songs Mrs. Grogan sang—and the plumber’s widow was not such a fool
that she used Christmas carols). Homer Wells used to have nightmares about
deciphering the passages that the plumber’s widow concocted.

o lorde mi got wen i en ausum wundor

konsider al the wurlds thi hends hav mad . . .

Or there was this one:

o ruck of eges clift fur me let mi hid misulf en theee . . .

And so forth.

The third tutor, a retired schoolteacher from Camden, was an old, unhappy

man who lived with his daughter’s family because he couldn’t take care of
himself. He taught history, but he had no books. He taught the world from

memory; he said the dates weren’t important. He was capable of sustaining a
rant about Mesopotamia for a full half hour, but when he paused for breath, or
for a sip of water, he would find himself in Rome, or in Troy; he would recite
long, uninterrupted passages from Thucydides, but a mere swallow would
transport him to Elba, with Napoleon.

a sense of the scope of history.”

Nurse Angela rolled her eyes. “Whenever I try to listen to him,” she said, “I

can think of a hundred good reasons for war.”

She meant, Homer Wells understood, that no one should live so long.
It is easy to understand why Homer was more fond of doing chores than he

was fond of education.

Homer’s favorite chore was selecting, for Dr. Larch, the evening reading. He

was supposed to estimate a passage that would take Dr. Larch exactly twenty
minutes to read; this was difficult because when Homer read aloud to himself,
he read more slowly than Dr. Larch, but when he simply read to himself, he
read more quickly than Dr. Larch could read aloud. At twenty minutes an
evening, it took Dr. Larch several months to read Great Expectations, and
more than a year to read David Copperfield—at the end of which time, St.
Larch announced to Homer that he would start at the beginning of Great
Expectations again. Except for Homer, the orphans who’d first heard Great
Expectations had moved on.

anyway. They were not only too young for the Dickensian language, they
were also too young to comprehend the usual language of St. Cloud’s. What
mattered to Dr. Larch was the idea of reading aloud—it was a successful
soporific for the children who didn’t know what they were listening to, and
for those few who understood the words and the story, the evening reading
provided them with a way to leave St. Cloud’s in their dreams, in their
imaginations.

that both Great Expectations and David Copperfield were concerned with
orphans. (“What in hell else would you read to an orphan?” Dr. Larch
inquired in his journal.)

marshland—“with some chains hanging to it which had once held a pirate”—
and Homer’s imagination of the orphan, Pip, and the convict, Magwitch . . .
the beautiful Estella, the vengeful Miss Havisham . . . provided him with
sharper details when, falling asleep, he would follow the ghostly mothers who
left St. Cloud’s in the cover of darkness, and boarded the horse-drawn coach

car, or, later, the bus which replaced the coach, and gave Homer Wells his first
sensation of the passage of time, of progress. Soon after the bus replaced the
coach, all bus service in St. Cloud’s was discontinued. Thereafter, the mothers
walked; this gave Homer further understanding of progress.

bothered to accompany them to St. Cloud’s—where were they? Homer liked
the part in Great Expectations when Pip is just starting out and he says that
“the mists had all solemnly risen . . . and the world lay spread before me.” A
boy from St. Cloud’s knew plenty about “mists”—they were what shrouded
the river, the town, the orphanage itself; they drifted downriver from Three
Mile Falls; they were what concealed one’s parents. They were the clouds of
St. Cloud’s that allowed one’s parents to slip away, unseen.

only been as far as the mountains; they’re not nearly as spectacular as the sea.
There’s fog on the coast—it can be worse than the fog here—and when the
fog lifts, Homer . . . well,” said St. Larch, “that’s a moment you must see.”

. . . all solemnly risen.” He smiled at Dr. Larch and excused himself; it was
time to ring a bell. That was what he was doing—bell-ringing—when his
fourth foster family arrived at St. Cloud’s to fetch him. Dr. Larch had
prepared him very well; Homer had no trouble recognizing the couple.

Homer Wells was twelve, the couple who wanted to adopt him were simply
thought fanatical about everything that could be done outdoors. They were a
white-water-canoeing couple, an ocean-sailing couple—a mountain-climbing,
deep-sea-diving, wilderness-camping couple. A one-hundred-mile (at forced-
march-pace) tramping couple. Athletes—but not of organized sports; they
were not a sissy-sport couple.

o’clock fourteen times. He was transfixed by them—by their solid, muscular
looks, by their loping strides, by his safari hat, by her bushwacking machete
in a long sheath (with Indian beads) at her cartridge belt. They both wore
boots that looked lived in. Their vehicle was a homemade pioneer of what
would years later be called a camper; it looked equipped to capture and
contain a rhino. Homer instantly foresaw that he would be made to hunt bears,
wrestle alligators—in short, live off the land. Nurse Edna stopped him before
he could ring fifteen o’clock.

who has read Great Expectations and David Copperfield by himself, twice
each—and had each word of both books read aloud to him, also twice—is

more mentally prepared than most. Dr. Larch felt that the boy’s physical or
athletic development had been less certain. Sports seemed frivolous to Larch
when compared to the learning of more necessary, more fundamental skills.
Larch knew that the St. Cloud’s sports program—which consisted of indoor
football in the dining hall when there was bad weather—was inadequate. In
good weather, the boys’ and girls’ divisions played tag, or kick the can, or
sometimes Nurse Edna or Nurse Angela pitched for stickball. The ball was
composed of several socks wrapped in adhesive tape; it moved poorly. Larch
had nothing against an outdoor life; he also knew nothing about one. He
guessed that a little of its wasted energy (wasted to Larch) would be good for
Homer—possibly such physical activity might enhance the boy’s sense of
humor.

The couple’s name was a source of humor for Nurse Edna and Nurse

Angela. Their married name was Winkle—he was called Grant, she was
called Billy. They were members of Maine’s very small money class. Their
business, as they ridiculously called it, didn’t make a cent, but they didn’t
need to make money; they were born rich. Their needless enterprise consisted
of taking people to the wilderness and creating for them the sensation that
they were lost there; they also took people shooting down rapids in frail rafts
or canoes, creating for them the sensation that they would surely be bashed to
death before they drowned. The Winkles were in the business of
manufacturing sensations for people who were so removed from any
sensations of their own making or circumstances that only high (but
simulated) adventure could provoke any response from them at all. Dr. Larch
was not impressed with the Winkles’ “business”; he knew that they were
simply rich people who did exactly what they wanted to do and needed to call
what they did something more serious-sounding than play. What impressed
Larch with the Winkles was that they were deliriously happy. Among adults
—and among orphans—Wilbur Larch noted that delirious happiness was rare.

“In other parts of the world,” Dr. Larch wrote, “delirious happiness is

thought to be a state of mind. Here in St. Cloud’s we recognize that delirious
happiness is possible only for the totally mindless. I would call it, therefore,
that thing most rare: a state of the soul.” Larch was often facetious when he
discussed the soul. He liked to tease Nurse Edna and Nurse Angela in the
operating room, where the subject of the soul could catch the dear nurses off-
guard.

Once, with a body open on the table, Larch pointed dramatically to a

smooth, maroon shape beneath the rib cage and above the belly’s viscera; it
looked like a three-pound loaf of bread, or a slug with two great lobes.
“Look!” Larch whispered. “You rarely see it, but we’ve caught it napping.

Look quickly before it moves!” The nurses gaped. “The soul,” Larch
whispered reverentially. In fact, it was the body’s largest gland, empowered
with skills also ascribed to the soul—for example, it could regenerate its own
abused cells. It was the liver, which Larch thought more of than he thought of
the soul.

state of the soul, Wilbur Larch wished that some of it could rub off on Homer
Wells. The Winkles had always wanted a child—“to share the world of nature
with us,” they said, “and just to make a child happy, of course.” Looking at
them, Dr. Larch had his own ideas as to why they could not successfully
breed. Lack of the essential concentration, Larch thought; Larch suspected
that the Winkles never stopped moving long enough to mate. Perhaps, he
speculated, looking at Billy Winkle, she is not really a woman.

Grant had a plan. He has no face, Dr. Larch noticed, trying to discern the

man’s blunt features, somewhere between his blond beard and his blonder
hair. The hair was cropped in bangs, completely concealing a low forehead.
The cheeks, or what Larch could see of them, were a ridge, the eyes hidden
behind them. The rest was beard—a blond underbrush that Dr. Larch
imagined Billy Winkle needed her machete to hack through. Grant’s plan was
that they borrow Homer for a little moose-watching. The Winkles were going
on a canoe trip and portage through the northern State Forest, the principal
fun of which was to see moose. A secondary pleasure would be introducing
Homer Wells to a little white water.

St. Larch felt that such a trip, in the massive hands of the Winkles, wouldn’t

be dangerous for Homer. He felt less sure that Homer would want to stay with
these people, to actually be adopted by them. He hardly worried that the
Winkles’ craziness would bother the boy, and it wouldn’t have. What boy is
troubled by perpetual adventure? What Wilbur Larch suspected was that the
Winkles would bore Homer to tears, if not to death. A camping trip in the
State Forest—white water now and then, a moose or two—might give the boy
an idea of whether or not he could stand Grant and Billy forever.

“And if you have a good time in the woods,” Grant Winkle told Homer

cheerfully, “then we’ll take you out on the ocean!” They probably ride
whales, Homer imagined. They tease sharks, Dr. Larch thought.

But Dr. Larch wanted Homer to try it, and Homer Wells was willing—he

would try anything for St. Larch.

“Nothing dangerous,” Larch said sternly to the Winkles.
“Oh, no, cross our hearts!” cried Billy; Grant crossed his, too.
Dr. Larch knew there was only one road that ran through the northern State

Company. They were not allowed to cut the trees in the State Forest, but they
could drive their equipment through it en route to the trees that were theirs.
Only this—that Homer was going anywhere near where the Ramses Paper
Company was operating—troubled Dr. Larch.

Homer was surprised at how little room there was in the cab of the

homemade safari vehicle that the Winkles drove. The equipment it carried
was impressive: the canoe, the tent, the fishing gear, the cooking miscellany,
the guns. But there was little room for the driver and the passengers. In the
cab, Homer sat on Billy’s lap; it was a big lap but strangely uncomfortable
because of the hardness of her thighs. Homer had felt a woman’s lap only
once before, during St. Cloud’s annual three-legged race.

Once a year the boys’ and girls’ divisions amused the town with this race. It

was a fund-raiser for the orphanage, so everyone endured it. The last two
years Homer had won the race—only because his partner, the oldest girl in the
girls’ division, was strong enough to pick him up and run with him in her
arms across the finish line. The idea was that a boy and a girl of comparable
age fastened his left leg to her right; they then hopped toward the finish line,
on each of their free legs, dragging the miserable so-called third leg between
them. The big girl from the girls’ division hadn’t needed to drag Homer—she
cheated, she just carried him. But last year she had fallen at the finish line,
pulling Homer into her lap. By mistake, trying to get out of her lap, he’d put
his hand on her breast and she’d sharply pinched what the private school boy
in Waterville had called his pecker.

girls’ division, a typographical error. Melony’s name had been, officially,
Melody—but the girls’ division secretary was a terrible typist. The mistyping
was a fortunate mistake, actually, because there was nothing melodious about
the girl. She was about sixteen (no one really knew her exact age), and there
was in the fullness of her breasts and in the roundness of her bottom very
much the suggestion of melons.

pecker, too. He watched the houses disappear, and the farm animals; other
cars and trucks were gone from the roads. Soon it was just a road, a single
road—most often, it ran alongside water; the water ran fast. Ahead of them—
for hours, it seemed—loomed a mountain that had snow on the top, although
it was July. The mountain had an Indian name.

all that snow, there’s a lake.”

crazy about the lake, too.”

have to stay.

road and the rushing water, they pitched a tent with three rooms in it. They lit
a cookstove in one of the rooms, and Billy did one hundred sit-ups in another
room (Homer held her feet) while Grant caught some brook trout. It was such
a cool evening, there weren’t any bugs; they kept the lamps running long after
dark, with the tent flaps open. Grant and Billy told adventure stories. (In his
journal, Dr. Larch would later write, “What the hell else would they tell?”)

a bear giving birth. Billy showed Homer her bear scars. And then there was
the man who had asked the Winkles to cast him adrift at sea in a small boat—
with only one oar. This man had been interested in the sensation of survival.
He wanted to see if he could find his way back to land, but he wanted the
Winkles to observe him and rescue him if he was getting into real trouble.
The trick to that was not letting the man know he was being observed. At
night—when the fool fell asleep and drifted farther out to sea—the Winkles
would cautiously tow him toward shore. But in the morning—once, even
within sight of land—the man always found a way to get lost again. They
finally had to rescue him when they caught him drinking salt water; he’d been
so disappointed, he gave them several bad checks before he finally paid his
adventure fee.

“Adventure fee” was Billy’s name for it.
Homer thought it might make his would-be adoptive parents self-conscious

if he told them any stories about life at St. Cloud’s—or worse, about
Thanksgiving in Waterville. He felt he had to contribute something to the
campfire spirit of this present adventure, but the only good stories he knew
were Great Expectations and David Copperfield. Dr. Larch had let him take
the copy of Great Expectations with him; it was Homer’s favorite of the two.
Homer asked the Winkles if he could read them a little of his favorite story.
Of course, they said, they’d love it; they’d never been read to, not that they
could remember. Homer was a little nervous; as many times as he’d read
Great Expectations, he’d never read aloud to an audience before.

But he was wonderful! He even mastered what he guessed was Joe

Gargery’s accent, and by the time he got to the part where Mr. Wopsle cries
out, “ ‘No!’ with the feeble malice of a tired man,” Homer sensed he had
found the proper voice for the whole tale—he felt he might also have
discovered his first talent. Unfortunately, talented though he was, his reading
put the Winkles fast asleep. Homer kept reading by himself, through the end
of Chapter 7. Maybe it’s not my reading, Homer thought; maybe it’s the

Winkles—all her sit-ups, all his trout-catching, all the fierce rigor of the
indisputably great outdoors.

—comfortably around them. He blew out the lamps. He went to his own room
in the vast tent and crawled into his own sleeping bag. He lay with his head
by the open tent flap; he could see the stars; he could hear the nearby crashing
water. It did not remind him of Three Mile Falls, because the stream here was
so different from that river. It was just as fast, but it ran through a deep,
narrow gorge—sparkling clean, round-bouldered, with glossy pools where
Grant had caught the trout. It was not unpleasant imagining further adventures
with the Winkles, but Homer had more trouble imagining a moose. Exactly
how big would a moose be? Bigger than the Winkles?

Homer exhibited no mistrust, and certainly no fear, of the Winkles. He felt

for them only a detached wariness—he was sure they weren’t dangerous but
they were of a slightly altered species. He fell asleep confusing the Winkles,
in his child’s mind, with moose. In the morning he woke up to the sound of
what he was sure were moose—only to discover that it was the Winkles in the
tent room next to his. The Winkles appeared to greet the morning vigorously.
Although Homer had never heard human beings make love, or moose mate,
he knew perfectly well that the Winkles were mating. If Dr. Larch had been
present, he might have drawn new conclusions concerning the Winkles’
inability to produce offspring. He would have concluded that the violent
athleticism of their coupling simply destroyed, or scared to death, every
available egg and sperm.

large dogs, they burst into his room on all fours, tugging at his sleeping bag
with their teeth. They were going to swim! they told him. They were such
large people, Homer wondered at the sheer abundance of their active flesh. He
also wondered how they intended to swim in the raging stream without being
bashed against the boulders and swept away. Homer didn’t know how to
swim—not even in calm water.

cunning with equipment. They threw a line across the rapids; it was called a
survival rope, they told Homer. The rope attached to a rakelike cluster of
spikes, which Grant Winkle neatly lodged among the rocks on the far shore of
the roaring river; he then strung a second rope to this one, and then a third.
These additional ropes were complicated, with metal eyelets and hooks and
adjustable safety straps that went around the Winkles themselves and held
them tightly at their waists. With the assistance of this truly adventuresome
gear, the Winkles were able to bounce, semi-suspended, into the thick of the

rapids—where they were tossed about like bathtub toys while remaining
safely in the same place, attached to each other and to the so-called survival
rope. It was fun for Homer to watch them. The water seemed to swallow them
completely at times—streaming sheets of it would engulf them and suck them
down. Yet they would emerge in seconds, bouncing, appearing to walk across
the churning, rolling foam. They played in midstream like giant, blond otters.
Homer was very nearly convinced of their mastery of the elements—at least
of water—and felt himself to be on the verge of asking them to let him try the
game of showering in the rapids when it occurred to him that they couldn’t
hear him. If he’d called out to them—even if he’d screamed—the whoosh of
the turbid water all around the Winkles would have drowned out any noise he
could muster.

would-be adoptive parents play, when the ground began to shake under him.
He knew this more from certain badly told stories, in badly written children’s
books, than from the felt recognition of the moving ground itself; in those
children’s books, when something terrible is about to happen, the ground
always shakes. He almost chose not to believe it, but the ground was
unmistakably trembling; a dull hammering reached his ears.

everything. The Winkles continued to play in the rapids; they heard nothing,
they didn’t feel the ground shake because they weren’t on the ground.

Oh my God, a moose is coming! thought Homer Wells. He stood up. He

watched his feet hop—all by themselves—on the jumping ground. It is a herd
of moose! he thought. To add to the hammering sound, Homer now heard
sharper noises: cracks, some as startling as pistol shots. He looked at the
Winkles and could tell that they’d heard these harsh slaps, too. Whatever it
was that was coming, the Winkles were familiar with it; their entire attitude
changed—they were no longer playful. They seemed to be struggling, and on
their faces (now disappearing in the rushing white froth) their expressions
were both knowledgeable and frightened. When they got a second to look
(between plunges into the rapids), they looked upstream.

So did Homer—in time to see the log drive when it was about twenty-five

yards away. The trees along the shoreline were occasionally snapped off as
cleanly as kindling snapped over a knee—by a random log as big as a
telephone pole but stouter, hurtling out of the water, striking a boulder and
spinning for twenty feet through the air, leveling a patch of forest wherever it
crashed and rolled on. The mass of logs, each as big as telephone poles,
moved swiftly downstream with a wall of water in front of it. This water was
not like the clear water of the river, but muddy with turmoil, clogged with

slabs of bark, messy with whole chunks of ground that had been gouged out
of the shore. The Ramses Paper Company called it a modest log drive; they
said there’d been no more than four hundred, maybe seven hundred logs in
that particular drive downriver.

He turned in time to see the logs surge by. A line from the tent had been
attached to the Winkles’ survival rope, and the entire tent and everything in it
(Homer’s copy of Great Expectations, too) were swept downstream in the
pounding flow and charge of logs. The Ramses Paper Company wouldn’t
recover Billy and Grant’s bodies for three days; they found them nearly four
miles away.

Homer Wells was fairly calm. He looked upstream, waiting for more of

anything; upstream was clearly the direction whatever might come next
would come from. After a while, he relaxed; he examined the Winkles’ safari
vehicle, which looked naked without the tent and the kitchen equipment. He
found some fishing gear, but he didn’t dare to fish; it meant standing too close
to the stream. He found some guns, but he had no idea how they worked (he
felt comforted that the guns were there, however). He chose the biggest, most
dangerous-looking 
one—a 
twelve-gauge, 
double-barrel 
shotgun—and

dragged it around with him.

logging truck coming nearer and nearer; he knew it was a full one because of
the straining sound of the gears. It was also a piece of luck (on the order of his
not knowing how to swim, and therefore not joining the Winkles in their
sport) that the truck was going Homer’s way.

shotgun.

see it pull up to the hospital entrance. “Unless this is an absolute emergency,”
he told the smitten Nurse Edna, “I will not do a stitch of work on anyone from
that company!” Larch was actually disappointed to see Homer Wells, and
alarmed to see the shotgun. Homer had the bewildered expression on his face
of the many patients Larch had observed emerging from the spell of ether.

“You didn’t give the Winkles much of a chance, Homer,” Dr. Larch said

gravely. Then Homer explained why he’d come back so soon.

“You mean the Winkles are gone?” Dr. Larch asked.
“Swept away,” said Homer Wells. “Whoosh!”
That was when Wilbur Larch gave up on finding Homer Wells a home. That

was when Dr. Larch said that Homer could stay at St. Cloud’s for as long as
Homer felt he belonged there. That was when St. Larch said, “Well, then,

Homer, I expect you to be of use.”

For Homer Wells, this was easy. Of use, he felt, was all that an orphan was

born to be.

The Lord’s Work

A child of Maine, Wilbur Larch was born in Portland in 186_—the son of a
sullen, tidy woman who was among the staff of cooks and housekeepers for a
man named Neal Dow, the mayor of Portland and the so-called father of the
Maine law that introduced Prohibition to that state. Neal Dow once ran for the
presidency as the candidate of the Prohibition Party, but he won barely ten
thousand votes—proving that the general voter was wiser than Wilbur Larch’s
mother, who worshiped her employer and saw herself more as his co-worker
for temperance reform than as his servant (which she was).

Interestingly, Wilbur Larch’s father was a drunk—no small feat in the

Portland of Mayor Dow’s day. It was permitted to advertise beer in the shop
windows—Scotch ale and bitter beer, which Wilbur Larch’s father consumed
copiously; it was necessary, he claimed, to drink these weak brews by the
bucketful in order to get a buzz on. To young Wilbur, his father never looked
drunk—he never staggered or fell or lay in a stupor, he never shouted or
slurred his speech. Rather, he had about him the appearance of one
perpetually surprised, of one given to frequent and sudden revelations that
would stop him in his tracks, or in midsentence, as if something had just come
to him (or had just escaped him) that had preoccupied him for days.

He shook his head a lot, and all his life dispensed this misinformation: that

the nineteen-thousand-ton ship the Great Eastern, which was built in
Portland, was destined to sail the North Atlantic between Europe and Maine.
It was the opinion of Wilbur Larch’s father that the two best wharves in
Portland Harbor had been built specifically for the Great Eastern, that the
new and huge hotel in Portland had been built expressly to house the Great
Eastern’s passengers, and that someone evil or at least corrupt or just plain
foolish was responsible for keeping the Great Eastern from returning to her
home port in Maine.

Wilbur Larch’s father had worked as a lathe operator during the building of

the Great Eastern, and perhaps the complaining noise of that machinery and
the constant buzz he felt from all the beer he consumed had deceived him.
The Great Eastern had not been built for voyages to and from Portland; she
was originally intended for the route to Australia, but the many delays in
getting her to sea drove her owners to bankruptcy and she was purchased for
use on the North Atlantic route for which she proved unsuitable. She was, in
fact, a failure.

operator, and he had considerable loathing for temperance reform, his wife’s
beliefs and his wife’s employer, Mayor Neal Dow himself. In the opinion of
Wilbur Larch’s father, the Great Eastern didn’t return to Portland because of
Prohibition—that curse which had limited him to a bilious dependency on
Scotch ale and bitter beer. Since Wilbur knew his father only in the man’s
later years, when the Great Eastern was gone and his father was a porter in
the Portland station of the Grand Trunk Railway, he could only imagine why
working a wood-turning machine had been the high point of his father’s life.

As a boy, it never occurred to Wilbur Larch that his father’s missing fingers

were the result of too many Scotch ales and bitter beers while operating the
lathe—“just accidents,” his father said—or that his mother’s zeal for
temperance reform might be the result of a lathe operator’s demotion to
porter. Of course, Wilbur realized later, his parents were servants; their
disappointment made Wilbur become what his teachers called a whale of a
student.

kitchen entrance and ate his meals with the great prohibitionist’s hired help;
his father drank his meals, down at the docks. Wilbur Larch was a good
student because he preferred the company of books to overhearing his
mother’s talk of temperance with Mayor Dow’s servants.

He went to Bowdoin College, and to Harvard Medical School—where a

fascination with bacteria almost deterred him from practicing medicine,
almost turned him into a laboratory animal, or at least a bacteriologist. He had
a gift for the field, his professor told him, and he enjoyed the careful
atmosphere of the laboratory; also, he had a burning desire to learn about
bacteria. For nearly a year of medical school young Wilbur carried a
bacterium that so offended and pained him that he was driven by more than
scientific curiosity to discover its cure. He had gonorrhea: a gift, indirectly,
from his father. The old man, in his beer buzz, had been so proud of Wilbur
that he sent him to medicine school in 188_ with a present. He bought the boy
a Portland whore, setting up his son with a night of supposed pleasure in one
of the wharfside boardinghouses. It was a present the boy had been too

embarrassed to refuse. His father’s selfish nostalgia allowed him so few
gestures toward his son; his mother’s bitter righteousness was selfish in her
own way; young Wilbur was touched that his father had offered to give him
anything.

the curtains and to the bedspread—the whore reminded Wilbur of one of his
mother’s more attractive servant-colleagues; he shut his eyes and tried to
imagine that he was embarking on a forbidden romance in a back room of the
mayor’s mansion. When he opened his eyes, he saw the candlelight deepening
the stretch marks across the whore’s abdomen; he didn’t know they were
stretch marks, then. The whore seemed unconcerned whether Wilbur noticed
the stretch marks or not; in fact, as they fell asleep with his head on her
stomach, he was vaguely wondering if the woman’s wrinkles would transfer
to his face—marking him. A sharp, unpleasant smell awakened him and he
moved quickly off the woman, without disturbing her. In a chair in the room,
the one where she’d put her clothes, someone was smoking a cigar—Wilbur
saw the end glow brighter with each inhalation. He assumed that a man—the
whore’s next customer—was politely waiting for him to leave, but when he
asked if there was a fresh candle to light (he needed to locate his clothes), it
was a young girl’s voice that answered him.

distinctly but—since there was no fresh candle—she lit his way to his clothes
by puffing earnestly on her cigar, casting both a red glow and a haze of smoke
over his search. He thanked her for her help, and left.

again. A chatty woman in the daylight, she was carrying a bandbox with the
authority of a chronic shopper; he felt obliged to give her his seat on the
overcrowded train. A young girl was traveling with the whore—“my
daughter,” the whore said, indicating the girl with a jab of her thumb. The
daughter reminded Wilbur that they’d already met by breathing her
astonishingly foul cigar breath into his face. She was a girl not quite Wilbur’s
age.

The whore’s name was Mrs. Eames—“She rhymes with screams!” Wilbur’s

father had told him. Mrs. Eames told Wilbur she was a widow who lived a
proper life in Boston, but that in order to afford such a life she found it
necessary to sell herself in some out-of-the-way town. She begged Wilbur to
allow her to keep her appearances and her reputation intact—in Boston.
Wilbur not only assured her that her reputation was safe with him; he also,
unasked, paid her more money of his own, on the spot, than his father had
originally paid the woman. The amount of the original payment, he learned

later—when his father told Wilbur that Mrs. Eames was a proper Portlander
of good reputation who occasionally was obliged to sell herself in Boston so
that she might afford to keep up her appearances in Portland. As an old favor
to Wilbur’s father, she had allowed—“Just this once!”—the exception of
lowering herself in her hometown.

Wilbur’s father didn’t know that Mrs. Eames had a daughter, who—by her

own confession—cost less than her mother and made no pretense of keeping
up appearances in either Boston or Portland. The sullen girl never spoke on
the train ride into Boston’s North Station; her cigar breath and her scornful
gaze spoke for her. Wilbur never told his father that there was some
contradiction regarding which town Mrs. Eames had a good reputation in, and
he never told his father that he caught the clap from Mrs. Eames, who might
not have known she had it.

tubes of females for years. Only the appearance of an abscess in the pelvis
might allow the woman to know that she carried the disease. The
symptomatology, the discharge and so forth, could go unnoticed for a long
time. It did not go unnoticed in Wilbur Larch; the bacterial infection, in these
prepenicillin days, lived on for months in young Wilbur, giving him his
passionate interest in bacteriology before burning itself out. It left his urethra
scarred and his prostate rocky. It left him fond of ether, too—because the
ether sleeps he occasionally administered to himself relieved him of the
burning sensation he experienced, both when he urinated and when he
dreamed. This singular and painful encounter with sexual pleasure—in
combination with Wilbur’s memory of his parents’ loveless marriage—
convinced the would-be doctor that a life of sexual abstinence was both
medically and philosophically sound.

In grief, Wilbur Larch’s mother shortly followed her temperance hero to the
grave. A few days later, Wilbur’s father auctioned every item from their
servants’ rooms in the former mayor’s mansion and rode the Grand Trunk
Railway to Montreal, a town less temperance-minded than Portland, and
where Wilbur Larch’s father pushed his liver beyond limits. His body was
returned to Portland on the same Grand Trunk Railway that had carried the
former lathe operator away. Wilbur Larch met the train; he played the porter
to his father’s remains. From the near-cadavers of the cirrhotic that he had
seen during his first internship, young Dr. Larch knew exactly what must have
been his father’s condition at the end. Cirrhosis turns the liver to a mass of
scars and lumps, the skin reflects the bile of jaundice, the stools lighten, the
urine darkens, the blood doesn’t clot. Dr. Larch doubted that his father would

have even noticed the accompanying impotence.

How moving to conclude that young Larch chose to be an obstetrician
because the loss of his parents inspired him to bring more children into the
world, but the road that led Larch to obstetrics was strewn with bacteria. The
demonstrator of bacteriology at Harvard Medical School, a Dr. Harold Ernst,
is best remembered as one of the first college baseball pitchers to throw a
curve ball; he was also the first college baseball player to become a
bacteriologist. In the early morning laboratory, before Dr. Ernst—the former
curve-ball pitcher—would arrive to set up his demonstrations, young Wilbur
Larch would be all alone. He didn’t feel alone in the presence of so many
bacteria growing in the little Petri dishes, in the presence of the bacteria
inhabiting his urethra and his prostate gland.

He would milk a drop of pus from his penis onto an ordinary stained slide.

Magnified more than a thousand times, the villains he spotted every morning
under the microscope were still smaller than common red ants.

Years later Larch would write that the gonococci looked stooped, like too-

tall visitors in an igloo. (“They bend,” he wrote, “as if they have waists and
are bowing to each other.”)

Young Larch would stare at his pus until Dr. Ernst would arrive and greet his

little living experiments all over the lab (as if they were his old baseball
teammates).

“Honestly, Larch,” the famous bacteriologist said one morning, “the way

you look into that microscope, you appear to be plotting revenge!”

But it was not the smirk of vengeance that Dr. Ernst recognized on Wilbur

Larch’s face. It was simply the intensity with which Larch was emerging from
his ether-daze. The young medical student had discovered that the light, tasty
vapor was a safe, effective killer of his pain. In his days spent fighting the
dancing gonococci, Larch had become quite a knowledgeable imbiber of
ether. By the time the fierce bacteria had burned themselves out, Larch was an
ether addict. He was an open-drop-method man. With one hand he held a
cone over his mouth and nose; he made this mask himself (by wrapping many
layers of gauze around a cone of stiff paper); with his other hand, he wet the
cone. He used a quarter-pound ether can punctured with a safety pin; the
drops that fell from the elbow of the safety pin fell in exactly the correct size
and at exactly the correct rate.

It was the way he would give ether to his patients, too, except that he gave

himself much less; when the hand that held the ether can felt unsteady, he put
the can down; when the hand that held the cone over his mouth and nose
dropped to his side, the cone fell off his face—it wouldn’t stay in place if no

one held it. He felt nothing of the panic that a patient being anesthetized with
ether experiences—he never approached the moment when there wasn’t
enough air to breathe. Before that happened, he always dropped the mask.

Lying-In to deliver babies in the poor districts of the city, he had a place in his
mind where the peace of ether resided. Although he carried the ether can and
the gauze cone with him, he didn’t always have time to anesthetize the
patient. The woman’s labor was often too far advanced for the ether to help
her. Of course he used it when he had the time; he would never share the
opinion of some of his elder colleagues that ether was a deviation from the
given—that children should be brought forth in pain.

Larch delivered his first child to a Lithuanian family in a coldwater, top-

floor apartment—the surrounding streets littered with squashed fruit and
tattered vegetables and horse droppings. There was no ice to put on the
abdomen, over the uterus, in case of postpartum hemorrhage. There was a pot
of water already boiling on the stove, but Larch wished he could sterilize the
entire apartment. He sent the husband out for ice. He measured the woman’s
pelvis. He mapped out the fetus. He listened to its heartbeat while he watched
a cat toying with a dead mouse on the kitchen floor.

woman in labor. To Dr. Larch she spoke a strange language of gestures, which
suggested to him that the would-be grandmother was feebleminded. She
indicated that a large mole on her face was either a source of hysterical
pleasure or hysterical pain—Larch couldn’t tell which; perhaps she simply
wanted him to remove it, either before or after he delivered the baby. She
found several ways to exhibit the mole—once by holding a spoon under it, as
if it were about to fall; once capping it with a teacup and revealing it
suddenly, as if it were a surprise or a kind of magician’s trick. But the zeal she
brought to each revelation of the mole suggested to Wilbur Larch that the old
woman simply forgot that she had already shown him her mole.

disapproval in tones that made Wilbur Larch think the child was being born.
Larch was grateful not to have to use the forceps; it was a short, safe, loud
delivery, following which the husband refused to wash the baby. The
grandmother offered, but Larch feared that her combination of excitement and
feeblemindedness would cause an accident. Indicating (as well as he could,
without the benefit of Lithuanian) that the child should be washed in warm
water and soap—but not boiled in the pot on the stove, and not held head
down under the coldwater tap—Larch turned his attention to the afterbirth,
which refused to come away. The way the patient kept bleeding, Larch knew

he would soon be faced with serious hemorrhage.

He begged the husband to hack him some ice—the strong fellow had

brought a whole block, borrowing the ice company’s tongs for this purpose
and standing in the kitchen with the tongs on his shoulder in a menacing
fashion. The block of ice could cool the uteri of several bleeding patients; to
apply it whole, to a single patient, would likely crush the uterus, if not the
patient. At this moment the grandmother lost her grip on the soapy child and
dropped it among the dishes soaking in the cold-water sink; this happened the
instant that the husband again trod upon the cat.

were distracted, Larch grasped the top of his patient’s uterus through her
abdominal wall and squeezed hard. The woman screamed and grabbed his
hands; the grandmother, abandoning the baby among the dishes, tackled
Larch at the waist and bit him between the shoulder blades. The husband
retrieved the child from the sink with one hand, but he raised the ice tongs
over Larch with the other. Whereupon, lucky Wilbur Larch felt the placenta
separate. When he calmly pointed to its appearance, the grandmother and the
husband seemed more in awe of it than of the child. After washing the baby
himself and giving the mother some ergot, he bowed a wordless good-bye.
Leaving the apartment, he was surprised to hear a commotion almost the
instant he closed the door: the grandmother, the iced patient, the husband—all
shouting in Lithuanian—and the baby giving forceful voice to its first family
quarrel. It was as if the delivery, and Dr. Larch’s entire appearance, had been
only a brief interruption to a life of unintelligible turmoil.

rotting head of lettuce, which gave under his foot with the disquieting softness
of a newborn baby’s skull. This time he did not confuse the cat’s terrible yowl
with the sounds a child can make. He looked up in time to see the object
flying through the window of the Lithuanian apartment. He was in time to
dodge it. It had clearly been hurled at him, and Larch wondered what
particular, perhaps Lithuanian, offense he had caused these poor people.
Larch was shocked to see that the object thrown from the window—and now
dead on the ground at his feet—was the cat. But he was not that shocked; for
a passing second, he feared it might have been the child. He had been told by
his professor of obstetrics at Harvard that “the tensile strength of the
newborn” was “a marvel,” but Larch knew that the tensile strength of a cat
was also considerable and he noted that the beast had failed to survive its fall.

perhaps the safest phase of their journey. Larch also appreciated the blunt
reminder given him by the prostitutes in the South End. They recalled for him
the painful gift of Mrs. Eames. He could not see the prostitutes without
imagining their bacteria under the microscope. And he could not imagine
those bacteria without feeling the need for the giddy warmth of ether—just a
sniff; just a light dose (and a light doze). He was not a drinking man, Dr.
Larch, and he had no taste for tobacco. But now and then he provided his
sagging spirits with an ether frolic.

One night, when Wilbur was dozing in the South End Branch of the Boston
Lying-In, he was informed by one of the doctors that there was an emergency
arrival, and that it was his turn. Although she had lost a lot of weight and all
of her youthfulness since Larch had last seen her, he had no trouble
recognizing Mrs. Eames. She was so frightened, and in such intense pain, that
she had difficulty catching her breath, and more trouble telling the nurse-
receptionist her name.

“Rhymes with screams,” said Dr. Larch helpfully.
If Mrs. Eames recognized him right away, she didn’t let on. She was cold to

the touch, her pulse was very fast, and her abdomen was as hard and white as
the knuckles of a tight fist; Larch could detect no signs of labor, and he
couldn’t hear the heartbeats of the fetus, which Larch couldn’t help imagining
as having features similar to Mrs. Eames’s sullen teen-age daughter. How old
would she be now? he wondered. Still about his own age—that much he had
time to remember before attending to his diagnosis of Mrs. Eames:
hemorrhage within the abdomen. He operated as soon as the house officer
could locate the necessary donors for the transfusion.

“Missus Eames?” he asked her softly, still seeking some recognition from

her.

“How’s your father, Wilbur?” she asked him, just before he operated.
Her abdomen was full of blood; he sponged away, looking for the source,

and saw that the hemorrhage issued from a six-inch rupture in the back of the
uterus. Larch performed a Caesarean section and delivered a stillborn child—
the pinched, scornful face of which forcibly reminded him of the cigar-
smoking daughter. He wondered why Mrs. Eames had come here alone.

To this point in the operation, young Larch felt in charge. Despite his

memories of the woman opened up before him—and his memories of her
transmitted disease, which he was only recently rid of—he felt he was
handling a fairly manageable emergency. But when he tried to sew up Mrs.
Eames’s uterus, his stitches simply pulled through the tissue, which he noticed
was the texture of a soft cheese—imagine trying to put stitches in Muenster!

He had no choice then; he had to remove the uterus. After all the transfusions,
Larch was surprised that Mrs. Eames’s condition seemed pretty good.

it was standard that an obstetrician’s background was surgical—Larch had
interned in surgery at Mass General—and the senior surgeon shared young
Larch’s bafflement with the disintegrating consistency of Mrs. Eames’s
uterus. Even the rupture was a puzzle. There was no scar of a previous
Caesarean section that could have given way; the placenta could not have
weakened the wall of the uterus because the afterbirth had been on the other
side of the uterus from the tear. There had been no tumor.

For forty-eight hours Mrs. Eames did very well. She consoled young Wilbur

on the death of his parents. “I never knew your mother, of course,” she
confided. She again expressed her concern that Wilbur consider her
reputation, which Wilbur assured her he would (and had—by refraining from
expressing his fears to the senior surgeon that the condition of Mrs. Eames
might somehow be the result of gonorrhea). He briefly wondered which story
Mrs. Eames was using at the moment, regarding her reputation: whether she
was claiming to live a proper life in Portland or in Boston; whether a third
city was now involved and necessarily a third fictitious life.

up with blood again, and Wilbur Larch reopened her wound; this time he was
quite afraid of what he’d find. At first, he was relieved; there was not as much
blood in her abdomen as before. But when he sponged the blood away, he
perforated the intestine, which he had hardly touched, and when he lifted up
the injured loop to close the hole, his fingers passed as easily through the
intestine as through gelatin. If all her organs were this same fragile jelly,
Larch knew Mrs. Eames wouldn’t live very long.

penis fell off in his hands; he tried to sew it back on but it kept disintegrating;
then his fingers gave way in a similar fashion. How like a surgeon! he
thought. Fingers are valued above penises. How like Wilbur Larch!

This helped to strengthen Larch’s conviction regarding sexual abstinence.

He waited for whatever had destroyed Mrs. Eames to claim him, but the
autopsy, which was performed by a distinguished pathologist, seemed off the
track.

“Scurvy,” the pathologist said.
So much for pathologists, thought Wilbur Larch. Scurvy indeed!
“Missus Eames was a prostitute,” Larch told the pathologist respectfully.

“She wasn’t a sailor.”

But the pathologist was sure about it. It had nothing to do with the

gonorrhea, nothing to do with the pregnancy. Mrs. Eames had died of the
sailor’s curse; she had not a trace of Vitamin C, and, the pathologist said,
“She had destruction of connective tissue and the tendency to bleed that goes
with it.” Scurvy.

puzzle and he had one good night’s sleep before Mrs. Eames’s daughter came
to see him.

“It’s not my turn, is it?” he sleepily asked the colleague who roused him.
“She says you’re her doctor,” the colleague told him.
He did not recognize Mrs. Eames’s daughter, who had once cost less than

Mrs. Eames; now, she would have charged more than her mother could get. If,
on the train, she had seemed only a few years younger than Wilbur, now she
seemed several years older. Her sullen teen-age quality had matured in a brash
and caustic fashion. Her makeup, her jewelry, and her perfume were
excessive; her dress was slatternly. Her hair—in a single, thick braid with a
sea-gull feather stuck in it—was so severely pulled back from her face that
the veins in her temples seemed strained, and her neck muscles were tensed—
as if a violent lover had thrown her to her back and held her there by her
strong, dark pigtail.

—its pungent odor escaping through a leaky cork stopper. The bottle’s label
was illegibly stained.

There’s other ways.”

breath.

was, I ain’t quick.”

a fetus was quick it meant the mother had felt it move, it meant the mother
was about half through her gestation period, usually in her fourth or fifth
month; to some doctors, with religion, when a fetus was quick it meant it had
a soul. Wilbur Larch didn’t think anyone had a soul, but until the middle of
the nineteenth century, the common law’s attitude toward abortion was simple
and (to Wilbur Larch) sensible: before “quickening”—before the first, felt
movement of the fetus—abortion was legal. More important, to the doctor in
Wilbur Larch, it was not dangerous to the mother to perform an abortion
before the fetus was quick. After the third month, whether the fetus was quick
or not, Wilbur Larch knew it had a grip on the uterus that required more force
to break.

provided sufficient force to break the grip that Mrs. Eames’s fetus had on her
—although, apparently, it had exerted enough force to kill the fetus and turn
Mrs. Eames’s insides to mush.

“It’s gotta be pure poison,” Mrs. Eames’s tough daughter remarked to

Wilbur Larch, who dabbed a little of his beloved ether on the bottle’s stained
label, cleaning it up enough to read.

FRENCH LUNAR SOLUTION

Restores Female Monthly Regularity!

Stops Suppression!

(Suppression, young Larch knew, was a euphemism for pregnancy.)

Caution: Dangerous to Married Women!

Almost Certainly Causes Miscarriages!

the label concluded; which, of course, was why Mrs. Eames had taken it and
taken it.

Larch had studied the abuse of aborticides in medical school. Some—like

the ergot Larch used to make the uterus contract after delivery, and pituitary
extract—directly affected the uterus. Others ruined the intestines—they were
simply drastic purgatives. Two of the cadavers Larch had worked with in
medical school had been victims of a rather common household aborticide of
the time: turpentine. People who didn’t want babies in the 1880s and 1890s
were also killing themselves with strychnine and oil of rue. The French Lunar
Solution Mrs. Eames had tried was oil of tansy; she had taken it for such a
long time, and in such amounts, that her intestines had lost their ability to
absorb Vitamin C. Thus did she turn herself into Muenster. She died, as the
pathologist had correctly observed, of scurvy.

Mrs. Eames could have chosen several other ways of attempting to abort the

birth of another child. There were stories that a rather notorious abortionist in
the South End was also the district’s most successful pimp. Because he
charged nearly five hundred dollars for an abortion, which very few poor
women could afford, in their indebtedness they became his whores. His
quarters—and others like his—were called, simply, “Off Harrison”—
appropriately vague, but not without meaning. One of the facilities of the
South Branch of the Boston Lying-In was established on Harrison Street, so
that “Off Harrison,” in street language, correctly implied something unofficial
—not to mention, illegal.

It did not make much sense to have an abortion “Off Harrison,” as Mrs.

Eames, perhaps, had reason to know. Her daughter also knew the methods of

that place, which was why she gave Wilbur Larch a chance to do the job—
and gave herself a chance to have the job done well.

“I said I ain’t quick,” Mrs. Eames’s daughter told young Larch. “I’d be easy.

I’d get out of here in just a couple of minutes.”

It was after midnight at the South Branch. The house officer was asleep; the

nurse-practitioner, an anesthesiologist, was also asleep. The colleague who
had woken Larch—he’d gone to sleep, too.

The dilation of the cervix at any stage of pregnancy usually leads to uterine

contractions, which expel the contents of the uterus. Larch also knew that any
irritant to the uterus would usually have the desired effect: contraction,
expulsion. Young Wilbur Larch stared at Mrs. Eames’s daughter; his legs felt
rocky. Perhaps he was still standing with his hand on the back of Mrs.
Eames’s seat on that swaying train from Portland, before he knew he had the
clap.

had spoken the word.

Mrs. Eames’s daughter took the sea-gull feather out of her pigtail and jabbed

Larch in the chest with the quill end. “Shit or get off the pot,” she said. It was
with the words “shit” and “pot” that the sour stench of cigar reached him.

sinus condition. For an abortion, he wouldn’t need as much ether as he liked
to use for a delivery; he would need only a little more than he routinely gave
himself. He also doubted it was necessary to shave the patient; patients were
routinely shaved for a delivery and Larch would have preferred it for an
abortion, but to save time, he could skip it; he would not skip ether. He would
put red merthiolate on the vaginal area. If he’d had a childhood like Mrs.
Eames’s daughter, he wouldn’t have wanted to bring a child into the world,
either. He would use the set of dilators with the Douglass points—rounded,
snub-nosed points, they had the advantage of an easy introduction into the
uterus and eliminated the danger of pinching tissue in withdrawal. With the
cervix dilated to the desired size, he doubted that—unless Mrs. Eames’s
daughter was well along in her third or fourth month—he would need to use
forceps, and then only for the removal of placenta and the larger pieces. A
medical school textbook had referred, euphemistically, to the products of
conception: these could be scraped from the wall of the uterus with a curette
—perhaps with two different-sized curettes, the small one to reach into the
corners.

up—or even to the house officer if it turned out to be necessary to keep the
girl until the morning (if there was any excessive bleeding, for example). He
was surprised by the sudden pain in his chest; Mrs. Eames’s savage daughter
was stabbing him with the sea-gull feather again.

stabbing him again and again, until the feather bent in her hand; she left it
stuck in his shirt. In turning away from him, her heavy braid brushed his face
—the braid’s odor overwhelmingly conveying smoke. When she was gone
and Larch plucked the sea-gull feather from his breast, he noticed that the oil
of tansy—the French Lunar Solution—had spilled on his hands. Its smell was
not unpleasant, but it momentarily overpowered the smell Larch liked and
was used to—it overpowered the ether; it put an end to his peace of mind.

They did not use ether “Off Harrison.” They didn’t concern themselves with
pain there. For pain “Off Harrison,” they used music. An outfit called The
German Choir practiced Lieder in the front rooms “Off Harrison.” They sang
passionately. Perhaps Mrs. Eames’s daughter appreciated it, but she made no
mention of the music when she was brought back to the South Branch a week
later. No one was sure how she got there; she appeared to have been flung
against the door. She also appeared to have been beaten about the face and
neck, perhaps for failing to pay the usual abortion fee. She had a very high
fever—her swollen face was as hot and dry to the touch as bread fresh from
the oven. From the fever and the tenseness of her abdomen, rigid as glass, the
house officer and the night nurse suspected peritonitis. The reason they woke
Wilbur was that Mrs. Eames’s daughter had a piece of paper pinned to the
shoulder of her dress.

DOCTOR LARCH—

SHIT OR GET OFF THE POT!

Pinned to her other shoulder—like a mismatched epaulette, pulling her dress

askew—was a pair of ladies’ underwear. They were her only pair. It was
discovered she wasn’t wearing any. Apparently, her panties had been pinned
there in a hurry; that way they wouldn’t be lost. Wilbur Larch didn’t need to
examine Mrs. Eames’s daughter very thoroughly in order to discover that the
abortion attempt had failed. A fetus with no heartbeat was imprisoned in her
uterus, which had suffered some haywire contraction and was in a state of
spasm. The hemorrhage and infection could have come from any of the
several methods employed “Off Harrison.”

There was the water-cure school, which advocated the use of an intrauterine

tube and syringe, but neither the tube nor the water was sterile—and the

syringe had many other uses. There was a primitive suction system, simply an
airtight cup from which all the air could be sucked by a foot-operated pump;
it had the power to abort, but it also had the power to draw blood through the
pores of the skin. It could do a lot of damage to soft tissue. And—as the little
sign said on the door “Off Harrison,” WE TREAT MENSTRUAL
SUPPRESSION ELECTRICALLY!—there was the McIntosh galvanic
battery. The long leads were hooked up to the battery; the leads had
intravaginal and intrauterine attachments on insulated, rubber-covered
handles; that way the abortionist wouldn’t feel the shock in his hands.

and without her having further words with him (beyond the “Shit or get off
the pot!” note that was pinned to her shoulder), her temperature was nearly
107. The house officer felt compelled to ask Larch if he knew the woman.
The note certainly implied an intimate message.

“She was angry with me for not giving her an abortion,” Wilbur Larch

replied.

“Good for you!” said the house officer.
But Wilbur Larch failed to see how this was good for anyone. There was a

widespread inflammation of the membranes and viscera of the abdominal
cavity, the uterus had been perforated twice, and the fetus, which was dead,
was true to Mrs. Eames’s daughter’s prediction: it had not been quick.

himself what happened there; he wanted to know where women went when
doctors turned them down. On his mind was Mrs. Eames’s daughter’s last
puff of cigar breath in his face as he bent over her before she died—reminding
him, of course, of the night he needed her puffing cigar to find his clothes. If
pride was a sin, thought Dr. Larch, the greatest sin was moral pride. He had
slept with someone’s mother and dressed himself in the light of her daughter’s
cigar. He could quite comfortably abstain from having sex for the rest of his
life, but how could he ever condemn another person for having sex?

The German Choir blasted him at the door with the little sign that promised
the return of menstruation electrically. There was a harsh and out-of-tune
piano—no oboe, no English horn, no mezzo-soprano—yet Larch thought the
music was remindful of Mahler’s Kindertotenlieder. Years later, when he first
heard the scream-concealing sound of the water rushing through Three Mile
Falls, he would remember the abortionist’s songs that pumped like jism “Off
Harrison.” He beat on the door—he could have screamed—but no one heard
him. When he opened the door and stepped inside, no one bothered to look at
him; The German Choir kept singing. The only instrument was a piano, and

there were not nearly enough chairs for the women, and there were only a few
music stands; the men stood huddled in two groups, far from the women;
there weren’t enough copies of the sheet music to go around. The choir
conductor stood by the piano. A lean, bald man without a shirt, he wore a
dirty-white shirt collar (perhaps to catch the sweat) and kept his eyes half
closed, as if in prayer, while his arms wildly pummeled the air—as if the air,
which was full of cigar smoke and the urine-like stink of cheap draft beer,
were hard to move. The choir pursued the man’s wild arms.

Larch walked behind the piano and through the only open door. He entered
into a room with nothing in it—not a piece of furniture, not a window. There
was only a closed door. Larch opened it and found himself in what was
obviously the waiting room—at least people appeared to be waiting there.
There were even newspapers and fresh flowers and an open window; four
people sat in pairs. No one read the papers or sniffed the flowers or looked
out the window; everyone looked down and continued to look down when
Wilbur Larch walked in. At a desk, with only a pad of paper and a cashbox on
it, sat an alert man eating something that looked like navy beans out of a
bowl. The man appeared young and strong and indifferent; he wore a pair of
work overalls and a sleeveless undershirt; around his neck, like a gym
instructor’s whistle, hung a key—obviously to the cashbox. He was as bald as
the choir conductor; Larch considered that their heads were shaved.

choir sitting out a song or two, said: “Hey, you don’t come here. You just
have the lady come by herself, or with a lady friend.”

In the front room, Wilbur Larch heard them singing something about

someone’s “dear mother”—wasn’t that what “mütterlein” meant?

“I’m a doctor,” Dr. Larch said.
The cashbox man kept eating, but he looked up at Larch. The singers took a

deep breath, and in the split-second silence Larch heard the man’s swift,
skillful spoon scrape against the bowl—and, from another room, the sound of
someone retching, quickly followed by the splash of vomit in a metal basin.
One of the women in the waiting room began to cry, but before Larch could
identify which of the women it was, the singers caught their breath and bore
down again. Something about Christ’s blood, Larch thought.

“What do you want?” the man asked Larch.
“I’m a doctor, I want to see the doctor here,” Larch said.
“No doctor here,” the man said. “Just you.”
“Then I want to give advice,” Larch said. “Medical advice. Free medical

advice.”

Larch’s offer could be found there. “You’re not the first one here,” the man
said, after a while. “You wait your turn.”

seat—taking a chair precisely between the twosomes of women already in the
room. He was too shocked by everything to be surprised when he recognized
one of the couples: the Lithuanian woman whose child he’d delivered (his
first delivery) sat mutely with her mole-faced mother. They wouldn’t look up
at him; Larch smiled at them and nodded. The woman was very pregnant—
too pregnant for an easy abortion, under the safest of circumstances. Larch
realized, with panic, that he couldn’t convey this to her; she spoke only
Lithuanian. She would associate him with delivering only live babies! Also,
he knew nothing of what might have become of her first baby—nothing of
what her life with that baby had been, or was now. He tapped his foot
nervously and looked at the other couple—also, clearly, a mother and her
daughter, but both of them were younger than the Lithuanians and it was hard
to tell which of them was pregnant. This abortion, at least, looked easier to
perform. The daughter looked too young to be pregnant, but then why, Larch
wondered, had the mother brought the girl here? Did she need the company so
badly, or was this meant as a lesson? Watch out—this could happen to you! In
the front room, the singers grew hysterical on the subject of God’s love and
something that sounded like “blinding destiny”—verblendenen Geschike.

Wilbur Larch stared at the shut door, behind which he had heard

unmistakable vomiting. A bee, crazily out of place, buzzed in the open
window and seemed to find the flowers fakes; it buzzed straight out again.
When Larch looked at the Lithuanian couple, he saw that the grandmother
had recognized him—and she had discovered a new way to exhibit her mole,
which had grown additional and longer hairs and had slightly changed color.
Pinching her fingers to either side of the mole, the grandmother inflamed the
surrounding skin and made the mole appear to explode from her face—like a
boil come to a head, about to burst. The pregnant woman seemed not to notice
her mother’s charmless demonstration, and when she stared at Larch she
appeared not to recognize him; for Larch, there was only Lithuanian written
on her face. Perhaps, Larch thought, her husband threw her baby out the
window and drove her mad. For a moment Larch thought that the choir might
be Lithuanian, but he recognized something about a battle between Gott und
Schicksal—clearly German, clearly God and Fate.

voices declaring that God had won. The young girl jumped from her seat, sat
down, hugged herself, cried out; she put her face in her mother’s lap to muffle

her cries. Larch realized she’d been the one to cry before. He also realized
that she must be the one needing the abortion—not her mother. The girl didn’t
look older than ten or twelve.

“Excuse me,” Larch said to the mother. “I’m a doctor.”
He felt like an actor with good potential who’d been crippled with a single

stupid line—it was all he had to say. “I’m a doctor.” What followed from
that?

“So you’re a doctor,” the mother said, bitterly, but Larch was happy to hear

she didn’t speak Lithuanian. “So what help are you?” the mother asked him.

“How many months is she?” Larch asked the mother.
“Maybe three,” the mother said suspiciously. “But I already paid them here.”
“How old is she?” Larch asked.
The girl looked up from her mother’s lap; a strand of her dirty-blond hair

caught in her mouth. “I’m fourteen,” she said defensively.

“She’ll be fourteen, next year,” the mother said.
Larch stood up and said to the man with the cashbox key, “Pay them back.

I’ll help the girl.”

“I thought you came for advice,” the man said.
“To give it,” Dr. Larch said.
“Why not take some while you’re here?” the man said. “When you pay,

there’s a deposit. You don’t get a deposit back.”

“How much is the deposit?” Larch asked. The man shrugged; he drummed

his fingers on the cashbox.

“Maybe half,” he said.
“Eure ganze Macht!” the choir sang. “Your whole power,” translated

Wilbur Larch. Many medical students were good in German.

When the evil door opened, an old couple, like someone’s bewildered

grandparents, peered anxiously into the waiting room—both confusion and
curiosity on their faces, which, like the faces of many old couples, had grown
to resemble each other. They were small and stooped, and behind them, on a
cot—as still as a painting—a woman lay resting under a sheet, her eyes open
but unfocused. The vomit basin had been placed on a towel on the floor,
within her reach.

couple. “He says he came to give you free medical advice. He says to pay
these ladies back. He says he’ll take care of the young lady himself.”

By the way that the old white-haired woman had become a presence—or,

stronger, a force—in the doorway between the waiting room and the operating
theater, Larch realized that she was in charge; the old white-haired man was
her assistant. The old woman would have looked at home in a pleasant

kitchen, baking cookies, inviting the neighborhood children to come and go as
they pleased.

“Doctor Larch,” Dr. Larch said, bowing a little too formally.
“Oh, yes, Doctor Larch,” the old woman said, neutrally. “Come to shit or to

get off the pot?”

The abortionist was known in the neighborhood “Off Harrison” as Mrs.

Santa Claus. She was not the original author of that remark—or of that note.
Mrs. Eames’s daughter had written that herself, before she went to see Mrs.
Santa Claus; she knew enough about the dangers “Off Harrison” to know that
she might be in no shape to write anything at all after Mrs. Santa Claus
finished with her.

He had imagined that in any meeting with an abortionist he (Dr. Larch) would
take charge. He still tried to. He walked into the operating theater and picked
up something, just to demonstrate his authority. What he picked up was the
suction cup with a short hose running to the foot pump. The cup fitted nearly
into the palm of his hand; he had no trouble imagining what else it fitted. To
his surprise, when he had attached the cup to his palm, Mrs. Santa Claus
began stepping on the foot pump. When he felt the blood rushing to his pores,
he popped the cup out of his palm before the thing could raise more than a
blood blister on the heel of his hand.

if in reply, the patient under the sheet drew Larch to her; the woman’s
forehead was clammy with sweat.

“You don’t know what you’re doing,” Dr. Larch said to Mrs. Santa Claus.
“At least I’m doing something,” the old woman said with hostile calm. “If

you know how to do it, why don’t you do it?” Mrs. Santa Clause asked. “If
you know how, why don’t you teach me?”

together. She sat up and tried to examine herself; she discovered that, under
the sheet, she still wore her own dress. This knowledge appeared to relax her.

“Please listen to me,” Dr. Larch said to her. “If you have a fever—if you

have more than just a little bleeding—you must come to the hospital. Don’t
wait.”

advice?”

mother with her young daughter that they should leave, but the mother was
concerned about the money.

“Pay them back!” Mrs. Santa Claus told the cashbox man.

“They don’t get the deposit back,” the man said again.
“Pay them back the deposit, too!” the old woman said angrily. She came into

the waiting room to oversee the disgruntled transaction. She put her hand on
Dr. Larch’s arm. “Ask her who the father is,” Mrs. Santa Claus said.

“That’s none of my business,” Larch said.
“You’re right,” the old woman said. “That much you got right. But ask her,

anyway—it’s an interesting story.”

and her daughter. She spoke to the mother. “Tell him who the father is,” she
said. The daughter began to snivel and whine; Mrs. Santa Claus ignored her;
she looked only at the mother. “Tell him,” she repeated.

clear—“her father.”

“Her father is the father,” Mrs. Santa Claus said to Dr. Larch. “Got it?”
“Yes, I’ve got it, thank you,” Dr. Larch said. He needed to put his arm

around the thirteen-year-old, who was sagging; she had her eyes shut.

“Maybe a third of the young ones are like her,” Mrs. Santa Claus told Larch

nastily; she treated him as if he were the father. “About a third of them get it
from their fathers, or their brothers. Rape,” Mrs. Santa Claus said. “Incest.
You understand?”

“Yes, thank you,” Larch said, pulling the girl with him—tugging the sleeve

of the mother’s coat to make her follow.

“Shit or get off the pot!” Mrs. Santa Claus yelled after them.
“All you starving doctors!” the cashbox man hollered. “You’re all over.”
The choir was singing. Larch thought he heard them say “vom keinen Sturm

erschrecket”—frightened by no storm.

the mother with her daughter collided with the woman who’d been under the
sheet. She was still groggy, her eyes were darting, and her dress was plastered
with sweat to her back.

than a little blood” . . . Then he saw the woman’s underwear pinned to the
shoulder of her dress. That reminding epaulette was the badge of “Off
Harrison,” a kind of ribbon for bravery. Obviously, the woman didn’t know
that her panties were there. Larch imagined that the South End was sprinkled
liberally with these staggering women, their panties pinned to their shoulders,
marking them as indelibly as that long-ago Puritan New England “A” upon
their bosoms.

“Wait!” Larch cried, and grabbed for the underwear. The woman didn’t want

to wait; as she pulled herself free of his grasp, the pin opened and stuck Larch

in the hand. After she’d gone, he put her panties in his suit-jacket pocket.

heady with song, but the choir was taking a beer break. The lean, bald
conductor had just dipped into his frothy stein when he looked up and saw Dr.
Larch leaving with the women; a moustache of foam whitened his lip and a
dab of the white froth shone on the end of his nose. The conductor raised his
stein toward Dr. Larch, offering a toast. “Praise the Lord!” the conductor
called. “You keep on saving those poor souls, Doc!”

been singing Mahler’s Songs on the Death of Children, but those were the
songs Wilbur Larch had heard.

“In other parts of the world,” wrote Dr. Wilbur Larch upon his arrival in St.
Cloud’s, “an ability to act before you think—but to act nonetheless correctly
—is essential. Perhaps there will be more time to think, here in St. Cloud’s.”

In Boston, he meant, he was a hero; and he wouldn’t have lasted long—

being a hero. He took the young girl and her mother to the South Branch. He
instructed the house officer to write up the following:

“This is a thirteen-year-old girl. Her pelvis is only three and a half inches in

diameter. Two previous, violent deliveries have lacerated her soft parts and
left her with a mass of unyielding scar tissue. This is her third pregnancy as a
result of incest—as a result of rape. If allowed to come to term, she can be
delivered only by Caesarean section, which—given the child’s delicate state
of health (she is a child), not to mention her state of mind—would be
dangerous. Therefore, I’ve decided to give her an abortion.”

“You have?” the house officer asked.
“That’s right,” Wilbur Larch said—and to the nurse-anesthesiologist, he

said, “We’ll do it immediately.”

The abortion took only twenty minutes; Larch’s light touch with ether was

the envy of his colleagues. He used the set of dilators with the Douglass
points and both a medium-sized and a small curette. There was, of course, no
mass of unyielding scar tissue; there were no lacerated soft parts. This was a
first, not a third pregnancy, and although she was a small girl, her pelvis was
certainly greater than three and a half inches in diameter. These fictional
details, which Wilbur Larch provided for the house officer, were intended to
make the house officer’s report more convincing. No one at the Boston Lying-
In ever questioned Larch’s decision to perform this abortion—no one ever
mentioned it, but Dr. Larch could tell that something had changed.

He detected the dying of conversations upon his entering a room. He

detected a general aloofness; although he was not exactly shunned, he was

never invited. He dined alone at a nearby German restaurant; he ate pig
knuckles and sauerkraut, and one night he drank a beer. It reminded him of
his father; it was Wilbur Larch’s first and last beer.

existence; one sexual experience, one beer, one abortion. But he’d had more
than one experience with ether, and the news, in the South End—that there
was an alternative to Mrs. Santa Claus and the methods practiced “Off
Harrison”—traveled fast. He was first approached while standing at a fruit-
vendor’s cart, drinking fresh-squeezed orange juice; a tall, gaunt woman with
a shopping bag and a laundry basket materialized beside him.

ain’t quick, I swear.”

was always saying to one colleague or another, “It’s not my turn, is it?” And
always the answer was the same: “She says you’re her doctor.”

finding their eyes; now he looked down, or away; like a city person, he made
their eyes hunt for his. In the same mail with his catalogue of surgical
instruments from Fred Halsam & Co. he received a copy of Mrs. W. H.
Maxwell’s A Female Physician to the Ladies of the United States. Until late in
187_, Mrs. Maxwell had operated a woman’s clinic in New York. “The
authoress has not established her hospital simply for the benefit of lying-in
women,” she wrote. “She believes that in the view of the uncharitableness of
general society towards the erring, it is fit that the unfortunate should have
some sanctuary to which to flee, in whose shade they may have undisturbed
opportunity to reflect, and hiding forever their present unhappiness, nerve
themselves to be wiser in the future. The true physician’s soul cannot be too
broad and gentle.”

evidence of uncharitableness towards the erring and that he had become, in
the view of the erring, the sanctuary to which to flee.

Instead, he fled. He went home to Maine. He applied to the Maine State

board of medical examiners for a useful position in obstetrics. While they
sought a position for him in some developing community, they liked his
Harvard degree and made him a member of their board. Wilbur Larch awaited
his new appointment in his old hometown of Portland, that safe harbor—the
old mayor’s mansion where he had spent the half life of his childhood, the
salty boardinghouse where he had caught his dose of life from Mrs. Eames.

him he would live a long time and have many children (“Too many to

count!”), which Larch understood as confirmation that, in seeking to become
an obstetrician, he had made the right choice; the fortune teller who had told
young Larch that he would never follow in his father’s footsteps, which was
all right with Wilbur Larch, who had no knowledge of lathes, no fondness for
drink, and was sure that his liver wouldn’t be the culprit of his final undoing;
and the Chinese herb doctor who had told Larch that he could cure the clap by
applying crushed green leaves and bread mold to his penis. The quack was
almost right. The chlorophyll in the plants would destroy the bacteria that
contributed to gangrene but it wouldn’t kill the dance couples in the pus cells,
those lively gonococci; the penicillin, extracted from some bread molds,
would. Years later, Larch would dream that if only Dr. Harold Ernst, Harvard
Medical School’s bacteriologist and curve-ball pitcher, and the Chinese herb
doctor from the South End had put their heads together . . . well, what
wouldn’t they have cured?

that dream.

branch hospitals of the Boston Lying-In. In 189_, less than half the mothers
were married. In the institution’s charter it was written that no patient would
be admitted “unless a married woman or one recently widowed, and known to
be of good moral character.” The benevolent citizen groups who had first
contributed thousands of dollars to provide for a lying-in hospital for the poor
. . . they had insisted; but in truth almost everyone was admitted. There was an
astonishing number of women claiming to be widows, or claiming marriage
to sailors off to sea—gone with the Great Eastern, Wilbur Larch used to
imagine.

In Portland, he wondered, why were there no orphans, no children or women

in need? Wilbur Larch did not feel of much use in the tidy town of Portland; it
is ironic to think that while he waited to be sent somewhere where he was
needed, a prostitute’s letter—about abandoned women and orphans—was
making its way to him from St. Cloud’s.

pleasure of his company was requested by a Mrs. Channing-Peabody of the
Boston Channing-Peabodys, who spent every summer on their coastal
property just east of Portland. The invitation suggested that perhaps young
Larch missed the Boston society to which he’d doubtlessly become
accustomed and would enjoy some tennis or croquet, or even some sailing,
before a dinner with the Channing-Peabodys and friends. Larch had been
accustomed to no Boston society. He associated the Channing-Peabodys with
Cambridge, or with Beacon Hill—where he was never invited—and although

he knew that Channing and Peabody were old Boston family names, he was
unfamiliar with this strange coupling of the two. For all Wilbur Larch knew
about this level of society, the Channings and the Peabodys might be throwing
a party together and for the purpose of the invitation had agreed to hyphenate
their names.

of Maine, he knew better than to learn to swim in that water; the Maine water,
in Wilbur Larch’s opinion, was for summer people and lobsters. And as for
tennis or croquet, he didn’t own the proper clothing. From a watercolor of
some strange lawn games, he had once imagined that striking a wooden ball
with a wooden mallet as hard as he could would be rewarding, but he wanted
time to practice this art alone and unobserved. He regretted the expense of
hiring a driver to take him to the Channing-Peabody summer house, and he
felt uncomfortably dressed for the season—his only suit was a dark, heavy
one, and he hadn’t worn it since the day of his visit “Off Harrison.” As he
lifted the big brass door knocker of the Channing-Peabody house (choosing to
introduce himself formally, rather than wandering among the people in their
whites at play at various sports around the grounds), he felt the suit was not
only too hot but also needed a pressing, and he discovered in the jacket pocket
the panties of the woman who’d aborted the birth of her child “Off Harrison.”
Wilbur Larch was holding the panties in his hand and staring at them—
remembering their valiant, epaulette position, their jaunty bravery on the
woman’s shoulder—when Mrs. Channing-Peabody opened the door to receive
him.

stuffed them into the pocket in the attitude of a handkerchief he’d just been
caught blowing his nose in. By the quick way Mrs. Channing-Peabody looked
away from them, Larch knew she’d seen the panties for what they were:
women’s underdrawers, plain as day.

had provided her with a clue to Larch’s identity.

Larch,” and bowed to the woman—a great gunship of a woman, with a tanned
face and a head helmeted in silver-gray hair, as sleek and as dangerous-
looking as a bullet.

us!” she added with a booming laugh that chilled the sweat on Wilbur Larch’s
back.

All the rest of them seemed to be named Channing or Peabody or Channing-

was a Cabot and a Chadwick and a Loring and an Emerald (who had the
dullest brown eyes), but the daughter whom Mrs. Channing-Peabody had
designated to meet Dr. Larch was the plainest and youngest and least healthy-
looking of the bunch. Her name was Missy.

“Missy?” Wilbur Larch repeated. The girl nodded and shrugged.
They were seated at a long table, next to each other. Across from them, and

about their age, was one of the young men in tennis whites, either the
Chadwick or the Cabot. He looked cross, or else he’d just had a fight with
Miss Channing-Peabody, or else he would rather have been seated next to her
himself. Or maybe he’s just her brother and wishes he were seated farther
away from her, thought Wilbur Larch.

The girl looked unwell. In a family of tans, she was pale; she picked at her

food. It was one of those dinners where the arrival of each course caused a
complete change of dishes, and as the conversation lapsed and failed, or at
least grew fainter, the sound of china and silverware grew louder, and a
tension mounted at the dinner table. It was not a tension caused by any subject
of conversation—it was a tension caused by no subject of conversation.

was either a Channing or a Peabody—seemed disappointed to learn that Larch
was an obstetrician. Still, the old codger insisted on knowing Dr. Larch’s
preferred method of expelling the placenta into the lower genital tract. Wilbur
Larch tried, quietly, to describe the expression of placenta to Dr. Peabody or
Dr. Channing, or whoever he was, but the old man was hard of hearing and
insisted that young Larch speak up! Their conversation, which was the dinner
table’s only conversation, thus progressed to injuries to the perineum—
including the method of holding back the baby’s head to prevent a perineal
tear—and the proper mediolateral incision for the performance of an
episiotomy when a tear of the perineum seems imminent.

color beside him. She went from milk to mustard to spring-grass green, and
almost back to milk before she fainted. Her skin was quite cool and clammy,
and when Wilbur Larch looked at her, he saw that her eyes were almost
completely rolled up into her head. Her mother and the cross young man in
tennis whites, the Cabot or the Chadwick, whisked her away from the table
—“She needs air,” Mrs. Channing-Peabody announced, but air was not in
short supply in Maine.

came to him through the visible anger of young Chadwick or Cabot, it came
to him over the babbling senility of the old surgeon inquiring about “modern”
obstetrical procedure, it came to him through the absence of other

conversation and through the noise of the knives and the forks and the plates.
That was why he’d been invited: Missy Channing-Peabody, suffering from
morning sickness, needed an abortion. Rich people needed them, too. Even
rich people, who, in Wilbur Larch’s opinion, were the last to learn about
anything, even rich people knew about him. He wanted to leave, but now it
was his fate that held him. Sometimes, when we are labeled, when we are
branded, our brand becomes our calling; Wilbur Larch felt himself called. The
letter from the prostitute from St. Cloud’s was on its way to him and he would
go there, but first he was being called to perform—here.

cigars. The women had gathered around someone’s baby—a nurse or a
governess (a servant, thought Wilbur Larch) had brought a baby into the
dining room, and the women were having a look. Wilbur Larch had a look,
too. The women made room for him. The baby was rosy-looking and
cheerful, about three months old, but Dr. Larch noticed the forceps mark on
its cheek: a definite indentation, it would leave a scar. I can do better work
than this, he thought.

“Isn’t that a darling baby, Doctor Larch?” one of the women asked him.
“It’s too bad about that forceps mark,” Larch said, and that shut them all up.
Mrs. Channing-Peabody took him out into the hall. He let her lead him to

the room that had been prepared for him. On the way she said, “We have this
little problem.”

“How many months along is she?” he asked Mrs. Channing-Peabody. “Is

she quick?”

family had converted a small reading room into an operating theater. There
were old pictures of men in uniform, and books (looking long untouched)
stood at attention. In the grim room’s foreground was a solid table
appropriately set with cotton batting and rubber sheeting, and Missy herself
was lying in the correct examining position. She was already shaved, already
swabbed with the bichloride solution. Someone had done the necessary
homework; perhaps they’d pumped the senile family surgeon for details. Dr.
Larch saw the alcohol, the green soap, the nail brush (which he proceeded,
immediately, to use). There was a set of six metal dilators, and a set of three
curettes in a leather-covered, satin-lined case. There was chloroform and a
chloroform inhaler, and this one mistake—that they didn’t know Wilbur
Larch’s preference for ether—made Larch almost forgive them.

maybe even midwife to Missy. The old woman was particularly chisel-faced
and sharp-eyed when she looked at Larch, as if she expected him to
congratulate her—at which moment she would not acknowledge that he’d
spoken to her—for her precision in readying the patient. Mrs. Channing-
Peabody herself seemed unable to touch him; she did offer to hold his coat,
which he let her take before he asked her to leave.

meant the particularly hostile young man in tennis whites, whether he was the
outraged brother or the guilty lover or both. These people need me but they
hate me, Larch was thinking, as he scrubbed under his nails. While he let his
arms soak in the alcohol bath, he wondered how many doctors the Channing-
Peabodys must know (how many must be in the family!), but they would
never have asked one of their kind for help with this “little problem.” They
were too pure for it.

“You want my help?” the sullen young man asked Larch.
“Not really,” Larch replied. “Don’t touch anything and stand to my left. Just

look over my shoulder, and be sure you can see everything.”

young Cabot’s) face when Wilbur Larch went to work with the curette; with
the first appearance of the products of conception, the young man’s
expression opened—that certain, judgmental air was not discernible in any
aspect of his face, which seemed softened and resembled his tennis whites in
its color.

the ghostly young man. “It is a good, hard, muscular wall, and when you’ve
scraped it clean, it responds with a gritty sound. That’s how you know when
you’ve got all of it—all the products of conception. You just listen for that
gritty sound.” He scraped some more. “Can you hear it?” he asked.

“No,” the young man whispered.
“Well, perhaps ‘sound’ isn’t the right word,” Wilbur Larch said. “Perhaps

it’s more like a gritty feeling, but it’s a sound to me. Gritty,” he said, as young
Cabot or young Chadwick attempted to catch his own vomit in his cupped
hands.

“Take her temperature every hour,” Larch told the rigid servant who held the

sterile towels. “If there’s more than a little bleeding, or if she has a fever, I
should be called. And treat her like a princess,” Wilbur Larch told the old
woman and the ashen, empty young man. “No one should be allowed to make
her feel ashamed.”

eyelids at her chloroform gaze; but when he put his coat on, he felt the

envelope bulge in the breast pocket. He didn’t count the money, but he saw
there were several hundred dollars. It was the mayor’s mansion all over again,
the servant’s quarters treatment; it meant the Channing-Peabodys wouldn’t
ask him back for tennis or croquet or a sail.

Missy’s genitals with the bichloride solution and had covered her with a
sterile vulval pad. He gave about twenty dollars to the young tennis player,
who had opened the door to the patio to breathe a little of the garden air.
Larch was going to leave. Then, when he shoved his hands in his coat pockets
and found the panties again, on an impulse he grabbed the placenta forceps
and took the instrument with him. He went off looking for the old surgeon,
but there were only servants in the dining room—still clearing the table. He
gave each of them about twenty or thirty dollars.

opened the mouth of the forceps, clamped the pair of panties from “Off
Harrison” in it, and then clamped the whole business to the old snorer’s lapel.

two hundred dollars there.

hundred dollars, to a gardener who was on his knees in a flower bed by the
main door. He would have liked to have handed the empty envelope back to
Mrs. Channing-Peabody; the grand lady was hiding from him. He tried to fold
the envelope and pin it to the main door under the big brass door knocker; the
envelope kept blowing free in the wind. Then he got angry and waded it up in
a ball and threw it into a manicured circle of green lawn, which served as a
rotary for the main driveway. Two croquet players on a far lawn held up their
game and stared first at the crumpled envelope and then at the blue summer
sky, as if a lightning bolt, at the very least, were momentarily expected to
strike Larch dead.

medical history—when abortion was legal, when many more complex
procedures than a simple abortion were routinely taught medical students:
such things as utero decapitation and fetal pulverization (these in lieu of the
more dangerous Caesarean section). He mumbled those words to himself:
utero decapitation, fetal pulverization. By the time he got back to Portland, he
had worked the matter out. He was an obstetrician; he delivered babies into
the world. His colleagues called this “the Lord’s work.” And he was an
abortionist; he delivered mothers, too. His colleagues called this “the Devil’s
work,” but it was all the Lord’s work to Wilbur Larch. As Mrs. Maxwell had
observed: “The true physician’s soul cannot be too broad and gentle.”

himself to remember: he had slept with someone’s mother and dressed
himself in the light of her daughter’s cigar. He could quite comfortably
abstain from having sex for the rest of his life, but how could he ever
condemn another person for having sex? He would remember, too, what he
hadn’t done for Mrs. Eames’s daughter, and what that had cost.

He would deliver babies. He would deliver mothers, too.
In Portland, a letter from St. Cloud’s awaited him. When the Maine State

board of medical examiners sent him to St. Cloud’s, they could not have
known Wilbur Larch’s feeling for orphans—nor could they have known his
readiness to leave Portland, that safe harbor from which the Great Eastern
had sailed with no plans for return. And they would never know that in the
first week Wilbur Larch spent in St. Cloud’s, he founded an orphanage
(because it was needed), delivered three babies (one wanted, two inevitable—
one would be another orphan), and performed one abortion (his third). It
would take Larch some years to educate the population regarding birth control
—the ratio would endure for some time: one abortion for every three births.
Over the years, it would go to one in four, then to one in five.

physician at the orphanage would not perform abortions; the birth rate would
climb, the number of orphans would double, but the replacement physician
said to Nurse Edna and to Nurse Angela that he was put on this earth to do the
Lord’s work, not the Devil’s. This feeble distinction would later prove useful
to Nurse Angela and to Nurse Edna, and to Dr. Wilbur Larch, who wrote his
good nurses from France that he had seen the real Devil’s work: the Devil
worked with shell and grenade fragments, with shrapnel and with the little,
dirty bits of clothing carried with a missile into a wound. The Devil’s work
was gas bacillus infection, that scourge of the First World War—Wilbur Larch
would never forget how it crackled to the touch.

meant his replacement] that the work at the orphanage is all the Lord’s work
—everything you do, you do for the orphans, you deliver them!”

Nurse Edna and Nurse Angela were already familiar with the proper language
for the work of St. Cloud’s—the Lord’s work and the Devil’s work, they
called it, just to keep it straight between themselves which operation was
being performed when. Wilbur Larch went along with it—it was useful
language—but both nurses were in agreement with Larch: that it was all the
Lord’s work that they were performing.

was Homer Wells. He went out into the world and came back to St. Cloud’s
so many times that it was necessary to put him to work; by the time a boy is a
teen-ager, he should be of use. But would he understand? the nurses and Dr.
Larch wondered. Homer had seen the mothers come and go, and leave their
babies behind, but how long before he started counting heads—and realized
that there were more mothers coming and going than there were babies left
behind? How long before he observed that not all the mothers who came to
St. Cloud’s were visibly pregnant—and some of them didn’t even stay
overnight? Should they tell him? the nurses and Dr. Larch wondered.

has the run of the place—he’s going to figure it out for himself.”

“He’s growing older every minute,” Nurse Angela said. “He’s learning

something new every day.”

in the same room with the new mothers, who were gaining their strength to
leave their babies behind; that was something even a child could observe. And
Homer Wells was frequently in charge of emptying the wastebaskets—all the
wastebaskets, even the operating-room wastebaskets, which were leakproof
and taken directly to the incinerator.

“What if he looks in a wastebasket, Wilbur?” Nurse Edna asked Dr. Larch.
“If he’s old enough to look, he’s old enough to learn,” St. Larch replied.
Perhaps Larch meant: if he’s old enough to recognize what there was to be

seen. After the Lord’s work, or after the Devil’s, much that would be in the
wastebasket would be the same. In most cases: blood and mucus, cotton and
gauze, placenta and pubic hair. Both nurses told Dr. Larch there was no need
to shave a patient for an abortion, but Larch was fussy; and if it was all the
Lord’s work, he thought, let it all look the same. The wastebaskets that Homer
Wells would carry to the incinerator held the history of St. Cloud’s: the
clipped ends of the silk and gut sutures, fecal matter and soap suds from the
enemas, and what Nurse Edna and Nurse Angela feared Homer Wells would
see—the so-called products of conception, a human fetus, or a recognizable
part thereof.

And that is how Homer Wells (an unlucky thirteen) would discover that both

the quick and the not quick were delivered at St. Cloud’s. One day, walking
back from the incinerator, he saw a fetus on the ground: it had fallen from the
wastebasket he’d been carrying, but when he saw it, he assumed it had fallen
from the sky. He bent over it, then he looked for the nest it might have
dropped from—only there were no trees. Homer Wells knew that birds didn’t
deliver their eggs in flight—or that an egg, while falling, couldn’t lose its
shell.

around a hospital, one heard that word—but what animal? It weighed less
than a pound, it was maybe eight inches long, and that shadow on its almost
translucent head was the first phase of hair, not feathers; and those were
almost eyebrows on its scrunched face; it had eyelashes, too. And were those
nipples—those little pale pink dots emerging on that chest the size of a large
thumb? And those slivers at the fingertips and at the toes—those were nails!
Holding the whole thing in one hand, Homer ran with it, straight to Dr. Larch.
Larch was sitting at the typewriter in Nurse Angela’s office; he was writing a
letter to The New England Home for Little Wanderers.

took the fetus from him and placed it on a clean white piece of typing paper
on Nurse Angela’s desk. It was about three months—at the most, four. Not
quite quick, Dr. Larch knew, but almost. “What is it?” Homer Wells asked.

“The Lord’s work,” said Wilbur Larch, that saint of St. Cloud’s, because that

was when he realized that this was also the Lord’s work: teaching Homer
Wells, telling him everything, making sure he learned right from wrong. It
was a lot of work, the Lord’s work, but if one was going to be presumptuous
enough to undertake it, one had to do it perfectly.

Princes of Maine, Kings of New England

“Here in St. Cloud’s,” Dr. Larch wrote, “we treat orphans as if they came
from royal families.”

In the boys’ division, this sentiment informed his nightly blessing—his

benediction, shouted over the beds standing in rows in the darkness. Dr.
Larch’s blessing followed the bedtime reading, which—after the unfortunate
accident to the Winkles—became the responsibility of Homer Wells. Dr.
Larch wanted to give Homer more confidence. When Homer told Dr. Larch
how he had loved reading to the Winkles in their safari tent—and how he
thought he had done it well, except that the Winkles had fallen asleep—the
doctor decided that the boy’s talent should be encouraged.

In 193_, almost immediately after seeing his first fetus, Homer Wells began

reading David Copperfield to the boys’ division, just twenty minutes a crack,
no more, no less; he thought it would take him longer to read it than it took
Dickens to write it. Faltering at first—and teased by the very few boys who
were near his own age (no boy was older)—Homer improved. Every night he
would murmur aloud to himself that book’s opening passage. It had the effect
of a litany—on occasion, it allowed him to sleep peacefully.

Whether I shall turn out to be the hero

of my own life, or whether that station will

be held by anybody else, these pages must show.

“Whether I shall turn out to be the hero of my own life,” Homer whispered

to himself. He remembered the dryness in his eyes and nose in the furnace
room at the Drapers’ in Waterville; he remembered the spray from the water
that had swept the Winkles away; he remembered the cool, damp, curled-in-
on-itself beginning that lay dead in his hand. (That thing he had held in his
hand could not have been a hero.)

And after “lights out,” and Nurse Edna or Nurse Angela had asked if anyone

wanted a last glass of water, or if anyone needed a last trip to the potty—when
those dots of light from the just-extinguished lamps still blinked in the
darkness, and every orphan’s mind was either sleeping, dreaming, or lingering
with David Copperfield’s adventures—Dr. Larch would open the door from
the hall, with its exposed pipes and its hospital colors.

“Good night!” he would call. “Good night—you Princes of Maine, you

Kings of New England!” (That thing Homer had held in his hand was no
prince—it hadn’t lived to be king.)

blackness. Whatever image of royalty that they could conjure would be left to
them. What princes and kings could they have seen? What futures were
possible for them to dream of? What royal foster families would greet them in
sleep? What princesses would love them? What queens would they marry?
And when would they escape the darkness left with them after Larch closed
the door, after they could no longer hear the retreating squeaks of Nurse
Edna’s and Nurse Angela’s shoes? (That thing he had held in his hand could
not have heard the shoes—it had the smallest, most wrinkled ears!)

The Princes of Maine that Homer saw, the Kings of New England that he
imagined—they reigned at the court of St. Cloud’s, they traveled nowhere;
they didn’t get to go to sea; they never even saw the ocean. But somehow,
even to Homer Wells, Dr. Larch’s benediction was uplifting, full of hope.
These Princes of Maine, these Kings of New England, these orphans of St.
Cloud’s—whoever they were, they were the heroes of their own lives. That
much Homer could see in the darkness; that much Dr. Larch, like a father,
gave him.

seemed to be what Dr. Larch was saying.

watched St. Larch’s every move. It was the astonishing coolness of the thing
that Homer couldn’t forget.

right?”

“Yes,” said Dr. Larch. “In a way, Homer, it was never alive.”
“Never alive,” said Homer Wells.
“Sometimes,” Dr. Larch said, “a woman simply can’t make herself stop a

pregnancy, she feels the baby is already a baby—from the first speck—and
she has to have it—although she doesn’t want it and she can’t take care of it
—and so she comes to us and has her baby here. She leaves it here, with us.
She trusts us to find it a home.”

“She makes an orphan,” said Homer Wells. “Someone has to adopt it.”
“Someone usually adopts it,” Dr. Larch said.
“Usually,” said Homer Wells. “Maybe.”
“Eventually,” Dr. Larch said.
“And sometimes,” said Homer Wells, “the woman doesn’t go through with

it, right? She doesn’t go through with having the baby.”

“Sometimes,” said Dr. Larch, “the woman knows very early in her

pregnancy that this child is unwanted.”

“An orphan, from the start,” said Homer Wells.
“You might say,” said Wilbur Larch.
“So she kills it,” said Homer Wells.
“You might say,” said Wilbur Larch. “You might also say that she stops it

before it becomes a child—she just stops it. In the first three or four months,
the fetus—or the embryo (I don’t say, then, ‘the child’)—it does not quite
have a life of its own. It lives off the mother. It hasn’t developed.”

“It’s developed only a little,” said Homer Wells.
“It hasn’t moved, independently,” said Dr. Larch.
“It doesn’t have a proper nose,” said Homer Wells, remembering it. On the

thing he had held in his hand, neither the nostrils nor the nose itself had
developed to its downward slope; the nostrils pointed straight out from the
face, like the nostrils of a pig.

no one will care for this baby if she has it, and she doesn’t want to bring a
child into the world and try to find it a home—she comes to me and I stop it.”

“Tell me again, what’s stopping it called?” asked Homer Wells.
“An abortion,” Dr. Larch said.
“Right,” said Homer Wells. “An abortion.”
“And what you held in your hand, Homer, was an aborted fetus,” Dr. Larch

said. “An embryo, about three to four months.”

Wells, who had an irritating habit of repeating the pigtails of sentences very
seriously, as if he were planning to read them aloud, like David Copperfield.

“And that’s why,” Dr. Larch said patiently, “some of the women who come

here don’t look pregnant . . . the embryo, the fetus, there’s just not enough of
it for it to show.”

here—they’re either going to have an orphan, or they’re going to stop it,
right?”

they want. An orphan or an abortion.”

“An orphan or an abortion,” said Homer Wells.

Nurse Edna teased Dr. Larch about Homer Wells. “You have a new shadow,
Wilbur,” she said.

“Doctor Larch,” Nurse Angela said, “you have developed an echo. You’ve

got a parrot following you around.”

“God or whatever, forgive me,” wrote Dr. Larch. “I have created a disciple, I

have a thirteen-year-old disciple.”

By the time Homer was fifteen, his reading of David Copperfield was so

successful that some of the older girls in the girls’ division asked Dr. Larch if
Homer might be persuaded to read to them.

“Just to the older girls?” Homer asked Dr. Larch.
“Certainly not,” said Dr. Larch. “You’ll read to all of them.”
“In the girls’ division?” Homer asked.
“Well, yes,” Dr. Larch said. “It would be awkward to have all the girls come

to the boys’ division.”

“Right,” said Homer Wells. “But do I read to the girls first or to the boys

first?”

“The girls,” Larch said. “The girls go to bed earlier than the boys.”
“They do?” Homer asked.
“They do here,” Dr. Larch said.
“And do I read them the same passage?” Homer asked. He was, at the time,

in his fourth journey through David Copperfield, only his third aloud—at
Chapter 16, “I Am a New Boy in More Senses Than One.”

But Dr. Larch decided that girl orphans should hear about girl orphans—in

the same spirit that he believed boy orphans should hear about boy orphans—
and so he assigned Homer the task of reading aloud to the girls’ division from
Jane Eyre.

It struck Homer immediately that the girls were more attentive than the

boys; they were an altogether better audience—except for the giggles upon
his arrival and upon his departure. That they should be a better audience
surprised Homer, for he found Jane Eyre not nearly so interesting as David
Copperfield; he was convinced that Charlotte Brontë was not nearly as good a
writer as Charles Dickens. Compared to little David, Homer thought, little
Jane was something of a whiner—a sniveler—but the girls in the girls’
division always cried for more, for just one more scene, when, every evening,
Homer would stop and hurry away, out of the building and into the night,
racing for the boys’ division and Dickens.

The night between the boys’ and girls’ division frequently smelled of

sawdust; only the night had kept the memory of the original St. Cloud’s intact,

dispensing in its secretive darkness, the odors of the old sawmills and even
the rank smell of the sawyers’ cigars.

Larch, who had his own memory of cigars; the doctor shuddered.

although the same exposed pipes, the same hospital colors, the same
dormitory discipline prevailed. On the one hand, it smelled sweeter; on the
other hand, it smelled sicker—Homer had difficulty deciding.

For going to bed, the boys and girls dressed alike—undervests and

underpants—and whenever Homer arrived at the girls’ division, the girls were
already in their beds, with their legs covered, some of them sitting up, some
of them lying down. The very few with visible breasts were usually sitting
with their arms folded across their chests to conceal their development. All
but one—the biggest one, the oldest one; she was both bigger and older than
Homer Wells. She had carried Homer across the finish line of a particularly
famous three-legged race—she was the one called Melony, who was meant to
be Melody; the one whose breasts Homer had mistakenly touched, the one
who’d pinched his pecker.

underpants not quite big enough for her, her hands on her hips, her elbows
pointed out like wings, her considerable bosom thrust forward; a bit of her
big, bare belly was exposed. Every night, Mrs. Grogan, who directed the girls’
division, would say, “Won’t you catch cold outside your covers, Melony?”

“Nope,” Melony would say, and Mrs. Grogan would sigh—it was almost a

groan. That was her nickname: Mrs. Groan. Her authority rested in her ability
to make the girls think that they caused her pain by doing harm to themselves
or each other.

“Oh, that hurts me to see that,” she would tell them when they fought, pulled

hair, gouged eyeballs, bit each other in the face. “That really hurts me.” Her
method was effective with the girls who liked her. It was not effective with
Melony. Mrs. Grogan was especially fond of Melony, but she felt she was a
failure at making Melony like her.

Mrs. Grogan would say, “only partially clothed. That really hurts me.”

But Melony would stay put, her eyes never leaving Homer Wells. She was

bigger than Mrs. Grogan, she was too big for the girls’ division. She was too
big to be adopted. She’s too big to be a girl, thought Homer Wells. Bigger
than Nurse Edna, bigger than Nurse Angela—almost as big as Dr. Larch—she
was fat, but her fat looked solid. Although he had not competed in the three-
legged race for several years, Homer Wells also knew that Melony was

strong. Homer had decided not to compete as long as he would be paired with
Melony—and he would be paired with her as long as he was the oldest boy
and she was the oldest girl.

In reading aloud from Jane Eyre, Homer needed to keep his eyes off

Melony; one look at her would remind him of having his leg tied to hers. He
sensed that she resented his withdrawal from the annual competition. He was
also afraid that she might sense how he liked her heaviness—how fat, to an
orphan, seemed such good fortune.

tears to the eyes of the girls in the girls’ division, and drew the most plaintive
sighs and moans from Mrs. Grogan, but these same, sweeter passages
extracted from Melony the most tortured breathing—as if sweetness provoked
in her an anger barely restrainable.

The end of Chapter Four provided Melony with too much anger to restrain.
“ ‘That afternoon lapsed in peace and harmony,’ ” Homer Wells read to

them; hearing Melony hiss at the words “peace” and “harmony,” he bravely
read on. “ ‘And in the evening Bessie told me some of her most enchanting
stories, and sang me some of her sweetest songs,’ ” Homer continued, glad
there was only one more sentence to get through; he saw Melony’s broad
chest heave. “ ‘Even for me [chirped little Jane Eyre], life had its gleams of
sunshine.’ ”

here! Let her show me the gleams of sunshine!”

“Oh, how it hurts me, Melony—to hear you say that,” Mrs. Grogan said.
“Sunshine?” Melony said with a howl. The younger girls crawled all the

way under their bedcovers; some of them began to cry.

Grogan said.

due at the boys’ division. This time the giggles attendant on his departure
were mixed with sobs and with Melony’s derision.

“Gleams!” Melony called after him.
“How this hurts us all,” Mrs. Grogan said more firmly.
Outside, the night seemed full of new scents to Homer Wells. Mingled with

the sawdust smell and the rank cigars, was that a waft of the raucous perfume
drifting over him from the former whore hotel? And something like sweat
from the bingo-for-money room? The river itself gave off a smell.

had fallen asleep. The others were open-eyed—seemingly, open-mouthed,
like baby birds; Homer felt he was rushing from nest to nest, his voice feeding

them as they always cried for more. His reading, like food, made them sleepy,
but it often woke Homer up. He usually lay awake after the nightly
benediction—the ince in “Princes” and the ing in “Kings” still rang in the
dark room. Sometimes he wished he could sleep in the baby room; the
constant waking and crying there might be more rhythmic.

The older orphans had their irritating habits. One of Nurse Edna’s John

Wilburs slept on a rubber sheet; Homer would lie awake, waiting to hear him
wet his bed. Some nights Homer would wake the child, march him to the
toilet, point his tiny pecker in the right direction, and whisper, “Pee, John
Wilbur. Pee now. Pee here.” The child, asleep on his feet, would hold it back,
waiting for the welcoming rubber sheet, that familiar dent and warm puddle in
the bed.

Some nights, when he felt irritable, Homer Wells would simply stand by

John Wilbur’s bedside and whisper his command in the boy’s ear: “Pee!”
With almost instantaneous results!

Stone. Fuzzy had a cough, a constant dry hack. He had wet, red eyes. He slept
inside a humidified tent; a waterwheel cranked by a battery and a fan to
distribute the vapor ran all night. Fuzzy Stone’s chest sounded like a tiny,
failing motor; the damp, cool sheets enclosing him fluttered through the night
like the tissue of a giant, semi-transparent lung. The waterwheel, the fan,
Fuzzy Stone’s dramatic gasps—they merged in Homer’s mind. If one of the
three were to stop, Homer doubted he’d know which two were still alive.

that the boy was born and slept in a former sawmill was doubtlessly not the
best thing for him. A child with chronic bronchitis was not easily adoptable.
Who wants to take home a cough?

When Fuzzy Stone’s coughing was too much for Homer Wells, when the

various engines that struggled to maintain Fuzzy were too much on Homer’s
mind—lungs, waterwheel and fan—Homer would quietly seek out the baby
room. Nurse Angela or Nurse Edna was always there, usually awake and
tending to one of the babies. Sometimes, when the babies were quiet, even the
nurse on duty was sleeping, and Homer Wells would tiptoe past them all.

appear to be looking for her baby in particular; she was just standing in her
hospital gown in the middle of the baby room, her eyes closed, absorbing the
smells and sounds of the baby room through her other senses. Homer was
afraid the woman would wake up Nurse Angela, who was dozing on the duty
bed; Nurse Angela would have been cross with her. Slowly, as Homer
imagined you might assist a sleepwalker, he led the woman back to the

mothers’ room.

The mothers were often awake when he went to peek in on them.

Sometimes he would get someone a glass of water.

The women who came to St. Cloud’s for the abortions rarely stayed

overnight. They required less time to recover than the women who had
delivered, and Dr. Larch discovered that they were most comfortable if they
arrived in the morning, shortly before light, and left in the early evening, just
after dark. In the daytime, the sound of the babies was not so prevailing
because the noise the older orphans made, and the talk among the mothers
and the nurses, confused everything. It was the sound of the newborn babies
that, Dr. Larch observed, upset the women having the abortions. At night—
except for John Wilbur’s peeing and Fuzzy Stone’s cough—the waking babies
and the owls made the only sounds at St. Cloud’s.

were not comforted to hear the cries and prattle of the newborn. You could
not plan the exact hour for a delivery, but Larch tried to plan the abortions for
the early morning, which gave the women the whole day to recover and
allowed them to be gone by evening. Some of the women traveled a long way
—in these cases, Larch recommended that they come to St. Cloud’s the night
before their abortions, when he could give them something strong to help
them sleep; they’d have the whole of the next day to recover.

expectant or delivered mothers. Homer Wells—in his insomniac tour of St.
Cloud’s—saw that, in sleep, the expressions of these overnight visitors were
no more nor less troubled than the expressions of the women who were
having (or who’d already had) babies. Homer Wells would try to imagine his
own mother among the faces of the sleeping and the wakeful women. Where
was she waiting to get back to—when the pain of her labor was behind her?
Or was there no place she wanted to go? And what, when she was lying there,
was his father thinking—if he even knew he was a father? If she even knew
who he was.

These are the things the women would say to him:
“Are you in training to be a doctor?”
“Are you going to be a doctor when you grow up?”
“Are you one of the orphans?”
“How old are you? Hasn’t anyone adopted you yet?”
“Did someone send you back?”
“Do you like it here?”
And he would answer:
“I might become a doctor.”

“Of course Doctor Larch is a good teacher.”
“That’s right: one of the orphans.”
“Almost sixteen. I tried being adopted, but it just wasn’t for me.”
“I wanted to come back.”
“Of course I like it here!”
One of the women—very expectant, her belly huge under a taut sheet—

asked him, “Do you mean, if someone wanted to adopt you, you wouldn’t
go?”

“I wouldn’t go,” said Homer Wells. “Right.”
“You wouldn’t even consider it?” the woman asked. He almost couldn’t look

at her—she seemed so ready to explode.

decide to stay, as long as I can help out around here—you know, be of use.”

The pregnant woman began to cry. “Be of use,” she said, as if she’d learned

to repeat the pigtails of sentences from listening to Homer Wells. She pulled
down the sheet, she pulled up her hospital gown; Nurse Edna had already
shaved her. She put her hands on her great belly. “Look at that,” she
whispered. “You want to be of use?”

“Right,” said Homer Wells, who held his breath.
“No one but me ever put a hand on me, to feel that baby. No one wanted to

put his ear against it and listen,” the woman said. “You shouldn’t have a baby
if there’s no one who wants to feel it kick, or listen to it move.”

“I don’t know,” said Homer Wells.
“Don’t you want to touch it or put your ear down to it?” the woman asked

him.

“Okay,” said Homer Wells, putting his hand on the woman’s hot, hard belly.
“Put your ear down against it, too,” the woman advised him.
“Right,” Homer said. He touched his ear very lightly to her stomach but she

strongly pressed his face against her; she was like a drum—all pings! and
pongs! She was a warm engine—shut off, but still tapping with heat. If
Homer had been to the ocean, he would have recognized that she was like the
tide, like surf—surging in and out and back and forth.

head right there,” the woman whispered, patting the place where she roughly
held Homer’s face. Right where? Homer wondered, because there was no
comfortable place to put his head, no place between her breasts and her belly
that wasn’t round. Her breasts, at least, looked comfortable, but he knew that
wasn’t where she wanted his head. He found it hard to imagine, from all the
noise and motion inside her, that the woman was carrying only one baby.
Homer Wells thought that the woman was going to give birth to a tribe.

“You want to be of use?” the woman asked him, crying gently now.
“Yes. Be of use,” he said.
“Sleep right here,” the woman told him. He pretended to sleep with his face

against the noisy boulder, where she held him snug. He knew when her water
had broken before she knew it—she had fallen that soundly asleep. He went
and found Nurse Edna without waking the woman, who before dawn
delivered a seven-pound baby girl. Since neither Nurse Edna nor Nurse
Angela was in charge of naming the girl orphans, after a few days someone
there gave her a name—probably Mrs. Grogan, who favored Irish names, or if
Mrs. Grogan had momentarily exhausted her supply, the secretary who typed
badly and was responsible for “Melony” instead of “Melody”; she also
enjoyed naming the little girls.

if his nighttime vigil with his face upon the mother’s jumping belly might
have given him the senses necessary to recognize her child.

sound of her, and how she’d moved under his ear, in the dark. But he kept
looking; he watched the girls in the girls’ division as if he expected her to do
something that would give her away.

He even admitted his private game to Melony once, but Melony was,

typically, derisive. “Just what do you think the kid’s going to do so you’ll
know which one she is?” Melony asked. “Is she going to gurgle, is she going
to fart—or kick you in the ear?”

orphans are notorious for interior games. For example, one of the oldest
games that orphans play is imagining that their parents want them back—that
their parents are looking for them. But Homer had spent an evening with the
mystery baby’s mother; he’d heard all about the mystery baby’s father—and
his lack of interest in the matter. Homer knew that the mystery baby’s parents
weren’t looking for her; that may have been why he decided he’d look for her.
If that baby girl was growing up, and if she was playing the old orphans’
game, wouldn’t it be better if there was at least someone who was looking for
her—even if it was just another orphan?

Dr. Larch tried to talk to Homer about Melony’s anger.

“Anger is a funny thing,” Dr. Larch began, believing that anger was an

unfunny thing.

“I mean, I agree, the passage about the ‘gleams of sunshine’—okay, it’s

sappy,” Homer said. “It’s one of those things—it makes you wince when you
read it, but it’s just what Jane would say, it’s just like her, so what can you

do?” Homer asked. “But Melony was violent about it.”

who was not born at St. Cloud’s. She’d been left at the hospital entrance one
early morning when she’d been four or five; she was always so big for her
age, it had been hard to tell how old she was. She hadn’t talked until she was
eight or nine. At first, Larch thought she might be retarded, but that wasn’t the
problem.

“Melony was always angry,” Dr. Larch tried to explain. “We don’t know

about her origins, or her early years, and she may not know herself what all
the sources of her anger are.” Larch was deliberating—whether or not he
should tell Homer Wells that Melony had been adopted and had been returned
more times than Homer. “Melony had several unfortunate experiences in
foster homes,” Dr. Larch said cautiously. “If you have the opportunity to ask
her about her experiences—and if she wants to talk about them—it might
provide her with a welcome release for some of her anger.”

don’t know,” he said. “I never tried to talk to her.”

Dr. Larch already regretted his suggestion. Perhaps Melony would

remember her first foster family and tell Homer about them; they had sent her
back because she allegedly bit the family dog in an altercation concerning a
ball. It wasn’t just the one fracas that upset the family; they claimed that
Melony repeatedly bit the dog. For weeks after the incident, she would creep
up on the animal and surprise it when it was eating, or when it was asleep.
The family accused Melony of driving the dog crazy.

men in the families, either fathers or brothers, had taken a sexual interest in
her. The fourth family claimed that Melony had taken a sexual interest in a
younger, female child. In the case of number five: the husband and wife
eventually separated because of Melony’s relationship with the husband—the
wife claimed that her husband had seduced Melony, the husband claimed that
Melony had seduced (he said “attacked”) him. Melony was not ambiguous
about the matter. “No one seduces me!” she told Mrs. Grogan proudly. In the
case of number six: the husband had died of a heart attack shortly after
Melony’s arrival, and the wife had sent the girl back to St. Cloud’s because
she felt unequipped for the task of raising Melony alone. (Melony’s only
remark to Mrs. Grogan had been: “You bet she’s unequipped!”)

All this, suddenly, Dr. Larch imagined Homer hearing firsthand from

Melony; the vision disturbed him. He feared that he had made Homer Wells
his apprentice—an attendant to the gritty operation of St. Cloud’s—while at
the same time he could not resist screening the boy from some of the harder

truths.

so like Nurse Edna to speak of the boy’s “perfection” and of his “innocence,”
but Dr. Larch worried about Homer’s contact with the damaged women who
sought the services of St. Cloud’s—those departing mothers in whose
characters and histories the boy must be seeking some definition of his own
mother. And the troubled women who were scraped clean and went away
leaving no one behind (just the products of conception)—what impression did
they make on the boy?

—every feeling and thought was visible upon it, the way a lake in the open
reflects every weather. He had a good hand for holding and eyes you could
confess to; Dr. Larch was worried about the specific details of the life stories
Homer would be exposed to—not simply the sordidness but also the abundant
rationalizations he would hear.

disturbed the boy with her anger—with what Dr. Larch suspected was only
the tip of the iceberg of her power; her potential for educating Homer Wells
seemed to be both terrible and vast.

when he read to the girls’ division. Homer had arrived early (hoping to leave
early), but he found the girls’ dormitory quarters in disarray. Many of the girls
were out of their beds—some of them shrieking when they saw him; their legs
were bare. Homer was embarrassed; he stood under the hanging bulb in the
communal bedroom, searching the room without success for Mrs. Grogan,
who was always nice to him, and clutching his copy of Jane Eyre in both
hands—as if the wild girls were likely to tear it away from him.

He did notice that Melony was already in her usual position, in her expected,

brief attire. He met her eyes, which were piercing but withholding opinion;
then he looked down, or away, or at his hands holding Jane Eyre.

“Hey, you,” he heard Melony say to him—and he heard a subsequent hush

fall among the other girls. “Hey, you,” Melony repeated. When he looked up
at her, she was kneeling on her bed and shoving toward him the biggest bare
ass he’d ever seen. A blue shadow (perhaps a bruise) discolored one of
Melony’s straining thighs; between the bulging, flexed cheeks of her
intimidating buttocks, a single dark eye stared at Homer Wells. “Hey,
Sunshine,” Melony said to Homer, who blushed the color of the sun at sunrise
or sunset. “Hey, Sunshine,” Melony crooned sweetly to him—thus giving to
the orphan Homer Wells her own name for him: Sunshine.

When Homer told Dr. Larch what Melony had done to him, Dr. Larch
reconsidered the wisdom of allowing Homer to read to the girls’ division. But
to remove this chore from the boy’s duties would constitute, Larch felt, a kind
of demotion; Homer might suffer a sense of failure. The work at an orphanage
is fairly decisive; when Wilbur Larch felt indecisive, regarding Homer Wells,
he knew he was suffering from the natural feelings of a father. The thought
that he had allowed himself to become a father and a sufferer of a father’s
indecision so depressed Dr. Larch that he sought the good peace of ether—to
which he was becoming, steadily, more accustomed.

room; it had a south window and an east window, and it was the east window,
in Nurse Edna’s opinion, that made Dr. Larch such an early riser. The slim,
white-iron hospital bed never looked slept in; Dr. Larch was the last to bed
and the first to rise—enhancing the rumor that he never slept at all. If he slept,
it was generally agreed that he slept in the dispensary. He did his writing at
night, at the typewriter in Nurse Angela’s office. The nurses had long ago
forgotten why this room was called Nurse Angela’s office; it was St. Cloud’s
only office room, and Dr. Larch had always used it for his writing. Since the
dispensary was where he slept, perhaps Dr. Larch felt the need to say that the
office belonged to someone else.

The dispensary had two doors (one leading to a toilet and shower), which in

such a small room created a problem with furniture. With a window on the
south end and on the east wall, and a door on the north and on the west, there
was no wall one could put anything against; the stark bed fit under the east
window. The closed and locked cupboards with their frail glass doors formed
an awkward maze around the dispensary counter in the middle of the room; it
seemed fitting, for a dispensary, that the medicines and the ether cans and the
hardware of small surgery should occupy the most central space, but Larch
had other reasons for arranging the room this way. The labyrinth of cabinets
in the middle of the room not only left access to the hall and bathroom doors;
it also blocked the bed from view of the hall door, which, like all the doors in
the orphanage, had no lock.

How Larch liked the heft of that quarter-pound can. Ether is a matter of
experience and technique. Imbibing ether is pungent but light, even though
ether is twice as heavy as air; inducing ether anesthesia—bringing one’s
patients through the panic of that suffocating odor—is different. With his
more delicate patients, Larch often preceded his ether administration with five
or six drops of oil of orange. For himself, he required no aromatic
preparation, no fruity disguise. He was always conscious of the bump the

ether can made when he set it on the floor by the bed; he was not always
conscious of the moment when his fingers lost their grip on the mask; the
cone—by the force of his own exhalations—fell from his face. He was
usually conscious of the limp hand that had released the cone; oddly, that
hand was the first part of him to wake up, often reaching for the mask that
was no longer there. He could usually hear voices outside the dispensary—if
they were calling him. He was confident that he would always have time to
recover.

which was all Larch needed to be brought back from his ether voy-age.

“Right here!” Larch would answer. “Just resting.”
It was the dispensary, after all; don’t the dispensaries of surgeons always

smell of ether? And for a man who worked so hard and slept so little (if he
slept at all), wasn’t it natural that he would need an occasional nap?

certain remote habits and singular powers.

doesn’t look at women? He doesn’t—believe me. He won’t even look at me,
and every male everywhere, every time, looks at me—men and boys look at
me. Even you, Sunshine. You look at me.” But Homer Wells looked away.

“And what’s the smell he carries around?” Melony asked.
“Ether,” said Homer Wells. “He’s a doctor. He smells like ether.”
“You’re saying this is normal?” Melony asked him.
“Right,” said Homer Wells.
“Like a dairy farmer?” Melony asked slyly. “He’s supposed to smell like

milk and cowshit, right?”

“Right,” said Homer Wells, cautiously.
“Wrong, Sunshine,” Melony said. “Your favorite doctor smells like he’s got

ether inside him—like he’s got ether instead of blood.”

shoulder. They were walking on the tree-stripped and eroded riverbank in the
part of St. Cloud’s where the abandoned buildings had remained abandoned;
the river there had eroded not only the bank but also the foundations of these
buildings, which in several cases did not have proper foundations or even
cellar holes—some of these buildings were set on posts, which were visible
and rotting in the gnawing water at the river’s edge.

designed to overhang the river, though it hung over the river now; through the
porch’s broken floorboards, Homer and Melony could watch the bruise-
colored water rush by.

the saw mills and lumberyards of the old St. Cloud’s; it was not a building of
sufficient style for the bosses or even the foremen—the Ramses Paper
Company people had kept rooms in the whore hotel. It was a building for the
sawyers, the stackers, the yardmen—the men who broke up the logjams, who
drove the logs downstream, who hauled the logs and cut lumber overland; the
men who worked the mills.

Inside, there were only an empty communal kitchen and the countless, sordid
bunkrooms—the ruptured mattresses infested with mice. Because of the
railroad, hoboes had come and gone, staking out their territory in the manner
of dogs, by peeing around it, thus isolating the mattresses least overrun by the
mice. Even with the window glass gone and the rooms half filling with snow
in the winters, there was no ridding the inside of that building from the smell
of urine.

cold, to warm itself on the floorboards of the porch, Melony said to Homer
Wells, “Watch this, Sunshine.” With surprising quickness of hand for such a
big girl, she seized the napping snake behind its head. It was a milk shake—
almost three feet long, and it twined around Melony’s arm, but Melony held it
the proper way, tightly, behind the head, not choking it. Once she had caught
it, she seemed to pay no attention to it; she watched the sky as if for a sign
and went on talking to Homer Wells.

“Your favorite doctor, Sunshine,” Melony said. “He knows more about you

than you know. And more about me than I know, maybe.”

Homer let this pass. He was wary of Melody, especially now that she had a

snake. She could grab hold of me just as quickly, he was thinking. She could
do something to me with the snake.

“You ever wish you knew who she was, why she didn’t keep you, who your
father was—you know, those things?”

around Melody’s arm; then it uncoiled itself and hung like a rope; then it
thickened and thinned, all by itself. Tentatively, it explored around Melody’s
big hip; appearing to feel more secure, it settled around her thick waist—it
could just reach.

“I was told I was left at the door,” Melony said. “Maybe so, maybe not.”
“I was born here,” said Homer Wells.
“So you were told,” Melony said.
“Nurse Angela named me,” Homer offered in evidence.

Melony said. She still watched the sky, she remained indifferent to the snake.
She’s bigger than I am, she’s older than I am, she knows more than I do,
thought Homer Wells. And she has a snake, he reminded himself, letting
Melony’s last remark pass.

here in Saint Cloud’s, there’s got to be a record of it. Your favorite doctor
knows who your mother is. He’s got to have her name on file. You’re written
down, on paper. It’s a law.”

“A law,” Homer Wells said flatly.
“It’s a law that there’s got to be a record of you,” Melony said. “In writing—

a record, a file. You’re history, Sunshine.”

typewriter in Nurse Angela’s office; if there were records, that was where
they would be.

is look her up. You just look up your file. You could look me up while you
were at it. A smart reader like you, Sunshine—it wouldn’t take you much
time. And any of it would make more interesting reading than Jane Eyre. My
file alone is more interesting than that, I’ll bet. And who knows what’s in
yours?”

hole in the porch floorboards at some passing debris; a broken branch,
perhaps, or a man’s boot—maybe a man’s leg—was swept by in the river.
When he heard a whistling sound, like a whip, he regretted taking his eyes
from the snake; he ducked; Melony was still concentrating on the sky. She
was swinging the snake around and around her head, yet her attention was
entirely on the sky—not on any sign that appeared there, either, but on a red-
shouldered hawk. It hung above the river in that lazy-seeming, spiral soaring
of hawks when they are hunting. Melony let the snake sail out over the river,
the hawk following it; even before the snake struck the water and started
swimming for its life, for shore, the hawk began to dive. The snake didn’t
fight the current, it raced with it, trying to find the angle that would bring it
safely under the eroded bank or into the tangled bracken.

“Watch this, Sunshine,” Melony said. A long ten yards offshore the hawk

seized the swimming snake and carried it, writhing and striking, aloft. “I want
to show you something else,” Melony said, already turning her attention from
the sky, now that the outcome was clear.

higher the hawk rose, the more easily it flew—as if the higher air had
different properties from the air down where the snake had flourished.

and upstairs to one of the darker bunkrooms. The room smelled as if there
might be someone in it—possibly, someone alive—but it was too dark to see
either the mice-invaded mattresses or a body. Melony forced open a ragged
shutter hanging by one hinge and knelt on a mattress against a wall that the
open shutter had brought to light. An old photograph was tacked to the wall,
in line with what had once been the head of someone’s bed; the tack had
rusted and had bled a rusty path across the sepia tones of the photograph.

Homer had looked at other photographs, in other rooms, though he had

neglected this one. The ones he remembered were baby pictures, and pictures
of mothers and fathers, he presumed—the kind of family photographs that are
always of interest to orphans.

loose with her fingernail, but the tack had been stuck there for years. Homer
knelt beside Melony on the rotting mattress. It took awhile for him to grasp
the content of the photograph; possibly, he was distracted by his awareness
that he had not been as physically close to Melony since he’d last been tied to
her in the three-legged race.

subject, if not its reason for existing), he found it a difficult photograph to go
on looking at, especially with Melony so close to him. On the other hand, he
suspected he would be accused of cowardice if he looked away. The
photograph reflected the cute revisions of reality engineered in many
photographic studios at the turn of the century; the picture was edged with
fake clouds, with a funereal or reverential mist; the participants in the
photograph appeared to be performing their curious act in a very stylish
Heaven or Hell.

leggy young woman and a short pony. The naked woman lay with her long
legs spread-eagled on a rug—a wildly confused Persian or Oriental (Homer
Wells didn’t know the difference)—and the pony, facing the wrong way,
straddled her. His head was bent, as if to drink or to graze, just above the
woman’s extensive patch of pubic hair; the pony’s expression was slightly
camera-conscious, or ashamed, or possibly just stupid. The pony’s penis
looked longer and thicker than Homer Wells’s arm, yet the athletic-looking
young woman had contorted her neck and had sufficient strength in her arms
and hands to bend the pony’s penis to her mouth. Her cheeks were puffed out,
as if she’d held her breath too long; her eyes bulged; yet the woman’s

expression remained ambiguous—it was impossible to tell if she was going to
burst out laughing or if she was choking to death on the pony’s penis. As for
the pony, his shaggy face was full of faked indifference—the placid pose of
strained animal dignity.

“Lucky pony, huh, Sunshine?” Melony asked him, but Homer Wells felt

passing through his limbs a shudder that coincided exactly with his sudden
vision of the photographer, the evil manipulator of the woman, the pony, the
clouds of Heaven or the smoke of Hell. The mists of nowhere on this earth, at
least, Homer imagined. Homer saw, briefly, as fast as a tremble, the darkroom
genius who had created this spectacle. What lingered with Homer longer was
his vision of the man who had slept on this mattress where he now knelt with
Melony in worship of the man’s treasure. This was the picture some
woodsman had chosen to wake up with, the portrait of pony and woman
somehow substituting itself for the man’s family. This was what caused
Homer the sharpest pain; to imagine the tired man in the bunkroom at St.
Cloud’s, drawn to this woman and this pony because he knew of no friendlier
image—no baby pictures, no mother, no father, no wife, no lover, no brother,
no friend.

turn away from the photograph. With a surprisingly girlish delicacy, Melony
was still picking at the rusty tack—in such a considerate way that she never
blocked Homer’s view of the picture.

“If I can get the damn thing off the wall,” she said, “I’ll give it to you.”
“I don’t want it,” said Homer Wells, but he wasn’t sure.
“Sure you do,” Melony said. “There’s nothing in it for me. I’m not interested

in ponies.”

her nail and torn her cuticle; a fine spatter of her blood newly marred the
photograph—quickly drying to a color similar to the streak of rust that ran
down the pony’s mane, across the woman’s thigh. Melony stuck the finger
with the broken nail in her mouth and handed the photograph to Homer Wells.

Melony allowed her finger to tug a little at her lower lip, pressing it against

her lower teeth. “You get it, don’t you, Sunshine?” she asked Homer Wells.
“You see what the woman’s doing to the pony, right?”

“Right,” said Homer Wells.
“How’d you like me to do to you what that woman is doing to that pony?”

Melony asked him. She stuck her finger all the way into her mouth, then, and
closed her lips around it, over the second knuckle joint; in this fashion she
waited for his answer, but Homer Wells let the question pass. Melony took her
wet finger out of her mouth, then, and touched its tip to Homer’s still lips.

Homer didn’t move; he knew that if he looked at her finger, his eyes would
cross. “If you’d like me to do that to you, Sunshine,” Melony said, “all you’ve
got to do is get me my file—get me my records.” She pressed her finger
against his lips a little too hard.

“Of course, while you’re looking up the file on me you can look up yourself

—if you’re interested,” Melony added. She took her finger away. “Give me
your finger, Sunshine,” she said, but Homer Wells, holding the photograph in
both hands, decided to let this request pass. “Come on,” Melony coaxed. “I
won’t hurt you.” He gave her his left hand, keeping the photograph in his
right; he actually extended his closed fist to her so that it was necessary for
her to open his hand before she could slip his left index finger into her mouth.
“Look at the picture, Sunshine,” she told him; he did as he was told. She
tapped his finger against her teeth while she managed to say, “Just get me the
file and you know what you’ll get. Just keep the picture and think about it,”
Melony said.

his finger in Melony’s mouth, kneeling beside her on the mattress home of
countless mice, would be eternal. But there was such a startling thump! on the
roof of the building—like a falling body, followed by a lighter thump (as if
the body had bounced)—that Melony bit down hard on his finger before he
could, instinctively, retrieve it from her mouth. Still on their knees, they
lurched into each other’s arms; they hugged each other and held their breath.
Homer Wells could feel his heart pound against Melony’s breasts. “What the
hell was that?” Melony asked.

woodsman whose photograph he clutched in his hand, the actual body of the
saw-mill laborer landing on the roof, a man with a rusty ripsaw in each hand,
a man whose ears would hear, in eternity, only the whine of those lumberyard
blades. In that thump! of dead weight upon the roof of the abandoned
building, Homer himself heard the snarling pitch of those long-ago saws—but
what was that sharp, almost human noise he heard singing above the buzz? It
was the sound of cries, Homer imagined: the paper-thin wails of the babies on
the hill, those first orphans of St. Cloud’s.

His hot cheek felt the flutter of the pulse in Melony’s throat. The lightest,

most delicate footsteps seemed to walk the roof—as if the body of the ghost,
after his fall, were changing back to spirit.

that he fell against the wall. The noise Homer made caused the spirit on the
roof to scurry, and to emit a piercing, two-syllable shriek—the easily
identified whistle of the red-shouldered hawk.

“Kee-yer!” the hawk said.
The hawk’s cry was apparently not recognizable to Melony, who screamed,

but Homer knew instantly what was on the roof; he rushed down the stairs,
across the porch to the wrecked rail. He was in time to see the hawk
ascending; this time the snake appeared easier to carry—it hung straight
down, as true as a plumb line. It was impossible to know if the hawk had lost
control of the snake, or if the bird had dropped the snake intentionally—
realizing that this was a sure, if not entirely professional, way to kill it. No
matter: the long fall to the roof had clearly finished the snake, and its dead
weight was easier to bear away than when it had lived and writhed in the
hawk’s talons and had repeatedly struck at the hawk’s breast. Homer noted
that the snake was slightly longer and not quite as thick as the pony’s penis.

was out of sight, she repeated her promise to him. “Just keep the picture and
think about it,” she repeated.

he had to think about!

“Adolescence,” wrote Wilbur Larch. “Is it the first time in life we discover
that we have something terrible to hide from those who love us?”

For the first time in his life, Homer Wells was hiding something from Dr.

Larch—and from Nurse Angela and Nurse Edna. And with the photograph of
the pony with its penis in the woman’s mouth, Homer Wells was also hiding
his first misgivings concerning St. Larch. With the photograph, he hid his first
lust—not only for the woman who gagged on the pony’s amazing instrument
but also for the inspired promise Melony had made him. Hidden with the
photograph (under his hospital-bed mattress, pinned against the bedsprings)
were Homer’s anxieties concerning what he might discover in the so-called
files—in the imagined record of his birth at St. Cloud’s. His own mother’s
history lay in hiding with that photograph, which Homer found he was more
and more drawn to.

He took it out from under the mattress and looked at it three or four times a

day; and at night, when he couldn’t sleep, he looked at it in candlelight—a
drowsy light in which the woman’s eyes appeared to bulge less violently, a
light in the flicker of which Homer imagined he could see the woman’s
cheeks actually move. The movement of the candlelight appeared to stir the
pony’s mane. One night when he was looking at the picture, he heard John
Wilbur wet his bed. More often, Homer looked at the picture to the
accompaniment of Fuzzy Stone’s dramatic gasps—the cacophony of lungs,
waterwheel and fan seemed appropriate to the woman-and-pony act that

Homer Wells so fully memorized and imagined.

or else it was the deception within him that made Homer Wells conscious of
Dr. Larch’s observations of him. When Homer would tiptoe down to Nurse
Angela’s office, late at night, it seemed to him that Dr. Larch was always at
the typewriter—and that he would always notice Homer’s careful movement
in the hall.

“Anything I can do for you, Homer?” Dr. Larch would ask.
“Just can’t sleep,” Homer would reply.
“So what’s new?” Dr. Larch would ask.
Did the man write all night? In the daytime, Nurse Angela’s office was busy

—it was the only room for interviews and phone calls. It was full of Dr.
Larch’s papers, too—his correspondence with other orphanages, with
adoption agencies, with prospective parents; his noteworthy (if occasionally
facetious) journal, his whatnot diary, which he called A Brief History of St.
Cloud’s. It was no longer “brief,” and it grew daily—every entry faithfully
beginning, “Here in St. Cloud’s . . .” or, “In other parts of the world . . .”

families who adopted the orphans. Contrary to Melony’s belief, no records
were kept of the orphans’ actual mothers and fathers. An orphan’s history
began with its date of birth—its sex, its length in inches, its weight in pounds,
its nurse-given name (if it was a boy) or the name Mrs. Grogan or the girls’
division secretary gave it (if it was a girl). This, with a record of the orphans’
sicknesses and shots, was all there was. A substantially thicker file was kept
on the orphans’ adoptive families—knowing what he could about those
families was important to Dr. Larch.

“Here in St. Cloud’s,” he wrote, “I try to consider, with each rule I make or

break, that my first priority is an orphan’s future. It is for his or her future, for
example, that I destroy any record of the identity of his or her natural mother.
The unfortunate women who give birth here have made a very difficult
decision; they should not, later in their lives, be faced with making this
decision again. And in almost every case the orphans should be spared any
later search for the biological parents; certainly, the orphans should, in most
cases, be spared the discovery of the actual parents.

they will, one day, want to know; at the very least, they will be curious. But
how does it help anyone to look forward to the past? How are orphans served
by having their past to look ahead to? Orphans, especially, must look ahead to
their futures.

later years, regret the decision to give birth here? If there were records, it
would always be possible for the real parents to trace their children. I am not
in the business of reuniting orphans with their biological beginnings! That is
the storytelling business. I am in the business for the orphans.”

showed to Homer Wells, when he caught Homer in Nurse Angela’s office
going through his papers.

to Dr. Larch.

not to be found.”

to the girls’ division to read Jane Eyre. Each night they had repeated a
wordless habit: Melony would stick her finger in her mouth—she appeared to
stick it halfway down her throat, her eyes bulging in mockery of the woman
with the pony—and Homer Wells would simply shake his head, indicating
that he hadn’t found what he was looking for. The note that said “Not to Be
Found” provoked a look of profound suspicion on Melony’s restless
countenance.

remember you when you were born; you didn’t become you until later.”

records, or written history—but Wilbur Larch was the only historian and the
only law at St. Cloud’s. It was an orphanage law: an orphan’s life began when
Wilbur Larch remembered it; and if an orphan was adopted before it became
memorable (which was the hope), then its life began with whoever had
adopted it. That was Larch’s law. After all, he had taken the necessary
responsibility to follow the common law regarding when a fetus was quick or
not yet quick; the rules governing whether he delivered a baby or whether he
delivered a mother were his rules, too.

about you more and more, but I don’t waste my time—or yours—thinking
about who you were before I knew you.”

It was a letter to someone at The New England Home for Little Wanderers,
which had been an orphanage even longer than St. Cloud’s.

an old colleague if not an old friend. There was in the tone of Larch’s
argument, too, the sparkle of frequent debate—as if the correspondent were
someone Larch had often used as a kind of philosophical opponent.

should be loved, and have someone to love, before they embark on that
necessary phase of adolescence: namely deceitfulness,” Larch argued in the
letter. “A teen-ager discovers that deceit is almost as seductive as sex, and
much more easily accomplished. It may be especially easy to deceive loved
ones—the people who love you are the least willing to acknowledge your
deceit. But if you love no one, and feel that no one loves you, there’s no one
with the power to sting you by pointing out to you that you’re lying. If an
orphan is not adopted by the time he reaches this alarming period of
adolescence, he may continue to deceive himself, and others forever.

“For a terrible time of life a teen-ager deceives himself; he believes he can

trick the world. He believes he is invulnerable. An adolescent who is an
orphan at this phase is in danger of never growing up.”

Of course, Dr. Larch knew, Homer Wells was different; he was loved—by

Nurse Angela and Nurse Edna, and by Dr. Larch, in spite of himself—and
Homer Wells not only knew that he was loved, he also probably knew that he
loved these people. His age of deceit might be blessedly brief.

in his letter to The New England Home for Little Wanderers. This also
occurred to Homer Wells, who had asked Melony—before he gave her the
note that her history was “Not to Be Found”—what she wanted to find her
mother for.

but if she’s not as big as I am, if I’m much stronger than she is, and I probably
am, then I’d like to strangle her.”

“To strangle her,” repeated Homer Wells uncontrollably.
“Why?” Melony asked him. “What would you do if you found your

mother?”

“I don’t know,” he said. “Ask her some questions, maybe.”
“Ask her some questions!” Melony said. Homer had not heard such scorn in

Melony’s voice since her response to Jane Eyre’s “gleams of sunshine.”

her, although Homer had found Dr. Larch, as usual, to be convincing. Homer
was also holding back; he was still deceiving Dr. Larch, and himself, a little.
The photograph of the woman with the pony was still pinned between his
mattress and his bedsprings; it had grown almost soft with handling. Frankly,
Homer was full of regret. He knew he could not produce Melony’s history
and that without it he would be denied the pony’s seemingly singular
experience.

“What does he mean, ‘Not to Be Found’?” Melony screamed at Homer; they
were on the sagging porch of the building where the woman and the pony had
spent so many years. “What he means is, he’s playing God—he gives you
your history, or he takes it away! If that’s not playing God, what is?”

ways; it was still Homer’s cautious opinion that Dr. Larch played God pretty
well.

playing God or leaving practically everything up to chance. It is my
experience that practically everything is left up to chance much of the time;
men who believe in good and evil, and who believe that good should win,
should watch for those moments when it is possible to play God—we should
seize those moments. There won’t be many.

find in the rest of the world, but that is only because so much that comes this
way has been left to chance already.”

building had heard much worse than this in its day, and Homer Wells let this
remark pass, too.

“Too bad for you, Sunshine,” Melony snapped at him. “Isn’t it?” she

insisted. He kept his distance.

“So!” she yelled—of which the Maine woods, across the river, managed

only a short echo of the “o!” She lifted her heavy leg and kicked a whole
section of the wrecked porch rail into the river. “So, this is it!” Melony cried,
but the forest was too dense to manage even a clipped echo of the “it!” The
Maine woods, like Homer Wells, let Melony’s remark pass. “Jesus!” Melony
cried, but the forest repeated nothing; the old building might have creaked—
possibly, it sighed. It was difficult to destroy that building; time and other
vandals had already destroyed it; Melony was looking for possible parts of the
building she could still destroy. Homer followed her at a safe distance.

smashed—and smashing it. “Sunshine, we’ve got nobody. If you tell me
we’ve got each other, I’ll kill you.”

It had not occurred to Homer to offer this or any other suggestion to

Melony; he kept silent.

she said—stamping her foot through a floorboard, trying to pry the floorboard
loose with both hands—“if you tell me that, I’ll torture you before I kill you.”

“Right,” said Homer Wells.
With the floorboard in both hands, Melony attacked the banister of the main

staircase; the banister was knocked apart easily, but the banister post, which
anchored the whole railing in the downstairs hall, remained upright. Melony
dropped the floorboard and seized the banister post in a bear hug.

“Goddamn you!” she screamed—at Dr. Larch, at her mother, at St. Cloud’s,

at the world. She wrestled the post to the floor; it was still attached to a main
support beam, under the floorboards, but Melony swung a piece of the
banister railing like a club until she was able to knock the post free. When she
tried to lift the post, and couldn’t, she turned to Homer Wells.

“Can’t you see I need help?” she said to him.
Together, they lifted the post; using it as a battering ram, they knocked down

the kitchen wall.

“Why aren’t you angry?” she asked Homer. “What’s wrong with you?

You’re never going to find out who did this to you! Don’t you care?”

“I don’t know,” said Homer Wells. Together, they ran the post head-on into

what appeared to be a fairly major beam; maybe it supports the second floor,
thought Homer Wells. They hit the beam three blows, bouncing off in a
different direction each time; with the fourth try, they cracked it. Something in
the building above them appeared to shift. Melony dropped her share of the
banister post and bear-hugged the cracked beam; she tried to run with the
beam, her momentum carrying her over the doorsill, out onto the porch. One
of the upstairs’ bunkrooms fell downstairs, into the kitchen; when that
happened, the porch roof partially collapsed, and what remained of the porch
railing was launched into the river. Even Melony seemed impressed with this
much destruction; she took Homer Wells by the hand and almost gently led
him upstairs—more than half the upstairs was still upstairs, including the
bunkroom where the pony and the woman had entertained a former
woodsman of St. Cloud’s.

and together managed to wrest the shutter free of the one hinge that held it;
they watched it fall straight through the porch roof and pass even more easily
through the porch floorboards before it splashed in the river. “Neat, huh?”
Melony asked dully.

roof. “Help me,” Melony said again; she indicated to Homer that he should sit
beside her.

to kill someone.” These notions seemed vaguely parallel if not equal to her.
Homer realized that it was not easy for him, in the case of Melony, “to be of
use,” but he tried.

“Don’t kill anyone,” he said. “Don’t run away.”

away, I mean someone will adopt you.”

“No, they won’t,” Homer said. “Besides, I wouldn’t go.”
“You’ll go,” Melony said.
“I won’t,” Homer said. “Please, don’t run away—please don’t kill anyone.”
“If I stay, you’ll stay—is that what you’re saying?” Melony asked him. Is

that what I mean? thought Homer Wells. But Melony, as usual, gave him no
time to think. “Promise me you’ll stay as long as I stay, Sunshine,” Melony
said. She moved closer to him; she took his hand and opened his fingers and
put his index finger in her mouth. “Lucky pony,” Melony whispered, but
Homer Wells wasn’t sure if the pony had been so lucky. The old building gave
a groan. Melony slid his index finger in and out of her mouth. “Promise me
you’ll stay as long as I stay, Sunshine,” she said.

the upstairs fell into the kitchen; there was a sympathetic shriek from the
twisted beams that still supported what was left of the porch roof.

and put it into her mouth? He was not afraid that the old building would
collapse and kill them both; this would have been a reasonable fear. He was
not thinking about the history of the mattress they were lying on; its history
was violent—even by Melony’s standards. He was not thinking of his own
lost history, and he wasn’t thinking that his being with Melony was or wasn’t
a betrayal of Dr. Larch. In part, the noise distracted Homer; there was the
noise that Melony made with her mouth—and her breathing—and then there
was his own breathing. The racket of this passion reminded him of little
Fuzzy Stone and the energy of those mechanisms that struggled to keep Fuzzy
alive. That such wet, breathy effort was made in Fuzzy’s behalf seemed to
emphasize how fragile his life was.

smaller, Melony increased her efforts. Homer’s major distraction was the
photograph itself, which he saw very clearly. He could even see the dust-free
rectangle on the wall where the photograph had been. If the photograph had,
at first, inspired him to imagine this act with Melony, now the photograph
directly blocked his ability to perform at all. If the woman in the photograph
had, at first, encouraged him to think of Melony, now the woman, and
Melony, seemed only abused. The pony’s brute insensitivity remained the
same: the dumb beast’s inappropriate passivity. Homer felt himself grow
tinier than he felt he’d ever been.

Melony was humiliated; she shoved him away. “Goddamn you!” she

screamed at him. “What’s wrong with you, anyway? And don’t you tell me

there’s anything wrong with me!”

“Right,” Homer said, “there isn’t.”
“You bet there isn’t!” Melony cried, but her lips looked sore—even bruised

—and he saw tears in the anger in her eyes. She yanked the mattress out from
under him; then she folded it in half and threw it out the window. The
mattress fell on the roof and stuck half through the hole the shutter had made.
This seemed to enrage Melony: that the mattress hadn’t passed cleanly
through to the river. She began to dismantle the bunk bed nearest her, crying
while she worked. Homer Wells, as he had retreated from her outrage at the
“gleams of sunshine,” retreated from her now. He sneaked down the
weakened stairs; when he stepped on the porch, it gave a sharp creak and
slumped in the direction of the river, momentarily throwing him off-balance.
He heard what sounded like several bunk beds, or a part of a wall, landing on
the roof above him; he fled for open ground. Melony must have seen him
through the upstairs window.

“You promised me, Sunshine!” she screamed at him. “You promised you

wouldn’t leave me! As long as I stay, you stay!”

along the bank, heading back to the occupied buildings of St. Cloud’s and to
the orphanage on the hill above the river. He was still on the riverbank, near
the water’s edge, when Melony managed to dislodge the overhanging porch
(the porch roof went with it); he stood and watched what looked like half the
building float downstream. Homer imagined that Melony—given time enough
—could possibly rid the landscape of the entire town. But he didn’t stay to
watch her ongoing efforts at destruction. He went directly to his bed in the
sleeping room of the boys’ division. He lifted his mattress; he intended to
throw the photograph away, but it was gone.

in the sleeping room, imprisoned in his humidified tent. That meant, Homer
knew, that Fuzzy was having a kind of relapse. The tent, at night, was Fuzzy’s
home, but when Fuzzy spent the day in the tent, the tent was referred to as his
“treatment.” He had to have what Dr. Larch called “tests” all the time, too,
and every day, everyone knew, he had to have a shot. Homer stood next to the
flapping, breathing, gasping contraption and asked Fuzzy Stone where the
photograph was. Homer was informed that John Wilbur had wet his bed so
thoroughly that Nurse Angela had told him to lie down on Homer’s bed while
she replaced the ruined mattress. John Wilbur had found the photograph; he
showed it to Fuzzy and to a few of the other boys who were around—among
them, Wilbur Walsh and Snowy Meadows; Snowy had thrown up.

Fuzzy was nine; next to Homer Wells, he was the oldest orphan in the boys’
division. Fuzzy said that Nurse Angela had come back with a fresh mattress
for John Wilbur and she had seen the photograph; naturally, she’d taken it
away. Of course, John Wilbur had told her where he’d found it. By now,
Homer knew, Nurse Edna would have seen it, and Dr. Larch would have seen
it, too. It crossed Homer’s mind to go find John Wilbur and hit him, but the
boy was too small—he would only pee; there would be this new evidence
against Homer.

“But what was it?” Fuzzy Stone gasped to Homer.
“I thought you saw it,” Homer said.
“I saw it, but what was it?” Fuzzy repeated. He looked genuinely frightened.
Snowy Meadows had thought that the woman was eating the pony’s

intestines, Fuzzy explained; Wilbur Walsh had run away. John Wilbur had
probably peed some more, thought Homer Wells. “What were they doing?”
Fuzzy Stone pleaded. “The woman,” Fuzzy said with a gasp, “how could she?
How could she breathe?” Fuzzy asked breathlessly. He was wheezing badly
when Homer left him. In the daylight Fuzzy seemed almost transparent, as if
—if you held him up to a bright enough source of light—you could see right
through him, see all his frail organs working to save him.

find him; Homer was thankful that Nurse Edna and Nurse Angela were not
around; he felt especially ashamed to face them. Outside the hospital entrance
he could see Nurse Angela talking to the man who hauled away the
nonburnable trash. The issue of their conversation was John Wilbur’s old
mattress. Homer went to the dispensary to see if Dr. Larch was there.

bed in the dispensary with a gauze cone that was more heavily saturated with
ether than was his usual habit. The reported vandalism to the so-called
sawyer’s lodge had upset Larch less than it had disturbed certain townspeople
who had witnessed the damage done by Homer and Melony—mostly by
Melony, Dr. Larch was sure. What are abandoned buildings for? Dr. Larch
wondered—if not for kids to vandalize, a little? The report that half the
building had floated downriver was surely exaggerated.

That woman with the pony.

interested in that kind of thing. Larch knew that Homer never would have
shown it to the younger boys; that Homer had kept such a photograph meant
to Wilbur Larch that it was time Homer was given more serious, adult
responsibilities. It was time to step up the apprenticeship.

had worked in the South End. Such photographs were everywhere; in Wilbur
Larch’s days at the Boston Lying-In, such pictures cost a dime.

trouble recognizing Mrs. Eames’s brave daughter. Larch had seen her cheeks
puffed out before—she was a veteran cigar smoker, no stranger to putting
terrible things in her mouth. And when she’d been brought to his door with
acute peritonitis, the result of whatever unspeakable injuries she had suffered
“Off Harrison,” her eyes had bulged then. To look at the photograph reminded
Larch of the life she must have had; it reminded him, too, that he could have
eased the pain of her life—just a little—by giving her an abortion. The
photograph reminded Larch of a life he could have—even if only
momentarily—saved. Mrs. Eames’s tragic daughter should have been his first
abortion patient.

Wilbur Larch looked at the photograph and wondered if Mrs. Eames’s

daughter had been paid enough for posing with the pony to be able to afford
the abortion fee “Off Harrison.” Probably not, he concluded—it wasn’t even a
very good photograph. Whoever had posed the participants had been careless
with the young woman’s stunning, dark pigtail; it could have been draped
over her shoulder, or even been made to lie near her breast, where its darkness
would have accented the whiteness of her skin. It could have been flung
straight back, behind her head, which at least would have emphasized the
pigtail’s unusual thickness and length. Obviously, no one had been thinking
about the pigtail. It lay off to the side of Mrs. Eames’s daughter’s face, curled
in a shadow that was cast by one of the pony’s stout, short, shaggy legs. In the
photograph, the pigtail was lost; you had to know Mrs. Eames’s daughter to
know what that dark shape off to the side of the woman’s straining face was.

“I’m sorry,” Larch said, inhaling. Mrs. Eames’s daughter did not respond, so

he said again, “I’m sorry.” He exhaled. He thought he heard her calling him.

“Doctor Larch!”
“Rhymes with screams,” Wilbur Larch murmured. He took the deepest

possible breath. His hand lost touch with the cone, which rolled off his face
and under the bed.

“Doctor Larch?” Homer Wells said again. The smell of ether in the

dispensary seemed unusually strong to Homer, who passed through the
labyrinth of medicine chests to see if Dr. Larch was on his bed.

sorry,” Dr. Larch said when he saw Homer beside his bed. He sat up too fast;
he felt very light-headed; the room was swimming. “I’m sorry,” he repeated.

“That’s okay,” said Homer Wells. “I’m sorry I woke you up.”

“Rhymes with screams,” said Wilbur Larch.
“Pardon me?” said Homer Wells.
In the closed dispensary, a fragrant mothball sent its vapory messages

everywhere.

sitting beside him on the bed. Larch wished his head was clearer; he knew this
was an important confrontation for the boy. Homer expected to be
reprimanded, and not in uncertain terms, but Larch feared he might not be in
the best shape for sounding certain.

thought, but the boy sitting beside him just waited patiently. Larch took a gulp
of what he hoped was clearer air; the fragrance of ether was still heavily
present in the dispensary; the air in the immediate vicinity was alternately
drowsy and sparkling with little stars.

“Vandalism is one thing, Homer,” Larch said. “And pornography—quite

another.”

day.

Right?”

“Right,” Homer said.
“Fine,” Larch said.
The stars sparkled so brightly on the ceiling of the dispensary that for a

moment Dr. Larch thought that their dialogue was taking place under the
nighttime firmament. He tipped his head back, to escape the fumes, but he
lost his balance and fell back on the bed.

“Are you okay?” Homer asked him.
“Fine!” Larch boomed heartily. Then he started to laugh.
It was the first time Homer Wells had heard Dr. Larch laugh.
“Listen, Homer,” Dr. Larch said, but he giggled. “If you’re old enough to

vandalize whole buildings and masturbate to pictures of women giving blow
jobs to ponies, then you’re old enough to be my assistant!” This struck Larch
as so funny that he doubled up on the bed. Homer thought it was a funny
thing to say, too, and he began to smile. “You don’t get it, do you?” Larch
asked, still giggling. “You don’t get what I mean.” He lay on his back and
waved his feet in the air while the firmament of stars circled above them. “I’m
going to teach you surgery!” Larch shouted at Homer, which dissolved both
of them into tears of laughter. “Obstetrical procedure, Homer,” Larch said;
Homer, now, fell back on the bed, too. “The Lord’s work and the Devil’s,
Homer!” Larch said, hooting. “The works!” he screamed. Homer started to

cough, he was laughing so hard. He was surprised when Larch—like a
magician—produced the photograph of the woman and the pony and waved it
in front of him. “If you’re old enough even to contemplate this,” Larch said,
“you’re old enough to have a grown-up’s job!” This cracked up Larch so
completely that he had to hand the photograph to Homer Wells—or else he
would have dropped it.

you start high school!” This was especially funny to Homer, but Dr. Larch
suddenly grew serious. He snatched the photograph back from Homer. “Look
at this,” he commanded. They sat on the edge of the bed and Larch held the
photograph steady on his knee. “I’ll show you what you don’t know. Look at
that!” he said, pointing to the pigtail, obscured in the shadow of the pony’s
leg. “What is it?” he asked Homer Wells. “Teen-agers: you think you know
everything,” Larch said threateningly. Homer caught the new tone of voice;
he paid close attention to this part of the picture he’d never looked at before—
a stain on the rug, maybe, or was it a pool of blood from the woman’s ear?

“Well?” Larch asked. “It’s not in David Copperfield. It’s not in Jane Eyre,

either—what you need to know,” he added almost nastily.

pool of blood in the photograph—that only a doctor could recognize it so
positively. “Blood,” Homer said. “The woman’s bleeding.” Larch ran with the
photograph to the lamp at the dispensary counter.

not blood, you idiot! That’s a pigtail!” He showed the photograph once more
to Homer Wells; it would be Homer’s last look at the photograph, though Dr.
Larch would look at it often. He would keep it attached to the pages of A Brief
History of St. Cloud’s; he did not keep it for pornographic interest but because
it reminded him of a woman he had abused twice. He had slept with her
mother in front of her, and he had not provided her with a service that she had
every right to request. He had not been a proper doctor to her, and he wanted
to remember her. That he was forced to remember her with a pony’s penis in
her mouth made Dr. Larch’s mistakes all the more forcefully mistakes to him;
Larch liked it that way.

He was a hard man—on himself, too.
He took a harder line toward Homer Wells than the hilarity of his promises

to the boy at first suggested—to teach him “the works,” as Larch called it,
was not so funny. Surgery, obstetrical procedure—even a normal birth, even
the standard D and C—required considerable background and preparation.

“You think it’s tough to look at a woman with a pony’s penis in her mouth,

Homer?” Larch asked him the next day—when he was not under the

influence of ether. “You ought to look at something that’s harder to
understand than that. Here,” Larch said, handing Homer the well-worn copy
of Gray’s Anatomy, “look at this. Look at it three or four times a day, and
every night. Forget pony penises, and learn this.”

“Here in St. Cloud’s,” wrote Dr. Wilbur Larch, “I have had little use for my

Gray’s Anatomy; but in France, in World War I, I used it every day. It was the
only road map I had over there.”

notebooks from medical school and from his internships; he began with the
chemistry lectures and the standard textbook. He set aside a corner of the
dispensary for a few easy experiments in bacteriology, although the sight of
Petri dishes caused Larch flashes of no uncertain pain; he was not fond of the
world there was to be seen under the microscope. Larch was also not fond of
Melony—specifically, he was not fond of her apparent hold on Homer Wells.
Larch assumed that they slept together; he assumed that Melony had initiated
him, which was true, and now forced him to continue, which was not the case.
In time, they would sleep together, albeit routinely, and that hold that Dr.
Larch imagined Melony had on Homer was balanced by a hold Homer had on
Melony (Homer’s promise to her, which Larch couldn’t see). He saw Melony
as Mrs. Grogan’s responsibility, and he was unaware how his responsibility
for Homer Wells might cloud his other responsibilities.

although not everything in the frog could be properly accounted for in Gray’s
Anatomy. It was Homer’s first visit to the river since he had fled from
Melony’s destruction of the so-called sawyers’ lodge, and Homer was
impressed to see that truly half the building was gone.

—not so much with any special skill that seemed to be required of Dr. Larch,
and not with the formal, efficient procedures carried out by Nurse Angela and
Nurse Edna. What impressed Homer was the process that was already so
much under way before Dr. Larch’s procedure began; what impressed Homer
was how much had happened to the woman and her child that was, internally,
just their natural progress—the actual rhythm of the labor (you could set a
watch to it), the power of the woman’s pushing muscles, the urgency of the
child to be born. The most unnatural thing about it, to Homer Wells, was how
clearly hostile the child found the environment in which it first exercised its
lungs—how clearly unfriendly, though not unexciting, the child’s new world
was to the child, whose first choice (had it been given a choice) might have
been to remain where it was. Not a bad reaction, Melony might have
observed, had she been there. However much Homer enjoyed having sex with

Melony, he was troubled that the act was more arbitrary than birth.

subdued to him, not defeated or even resigned; something in her had been
tired out, something about her look was worn down. She had been wrong,
after all, about the existence of her history in Dr. Larch’s hands—and being
wrong about important things is exhausting. She had been humiliated, too—
first by the incredible shrinking penis of little Homer Wells, and second by
how quickly Homer appeared to take sex with her for granted. And, Homer
thought, she must be physically tired—after all, she had single-handedly
obliterated a sizable chunk of the man-made history of St. Cloud’s. She had
pushed half a building into the flow of time. She has a right to look worn out,
thought Homer Wells.

if this or any story were newly informed by the recent experiences in his life:
a woman with a pony’s penis in her mouth, his first sexual failure, his first
routine sex, Gray’s Anatomy, and a live birth. He read with more appreciation
of Jane’s anxiety, which had struck him earlier as tedious. Jane has a right to
be anxious, he thought.

It was unfortunate timing—after what he and Melony had been through

together—that he encountered that passage in the middle of Chapter Ten,
where Jane imagines how it might be to leave her orphanage, where she
realizes that the real world is “wide,” and that her own existence is “not
enough.” Did Homer only imagine there was a new reverence in the girls’
division when he read this section—that Melony, especially, seemed poised
above the sentences, as if she were hearing them for the first time? And then
he hit this line:

I tired of the routine of eight years in one afternoon.

His mouth went dry when he read it; he needed to swallow, which gave the
line more emphasis than he wanted to give it. When he tried to begin again,
Melony stopped him.

“What was that? Read that again, Sunshine.”
“ ‘I tired of the routine of eight years in one afternoon,’ ” Homer Wells read

aloud.

“I know just how she feels,” Melony said bitterly, but quietly.
“It hurts me to hear you say that, Melony,” Mrs. Grogan began softly.
“I know just how she feels!” Melony repeated. “And so do you, Sunshine!”

she added. “Little Jane should try fifteen or sixteen or seventeen years,”
Melony announced loudly. “She should try it and see if she doesn’t ‘tire’ of
that routine!”

“You’ll only hurt yourself, dear, if you keep on like that,” Mrs. Grogan said.

And indeed, this seemed true; Melony was crying. She was such a big girl—
to put her head in Mrs. Grogan’s lap and allow her to stroke her hair—but she
just went on crying, quietly. Mrs. Grogan could not remember when she’d last
held Melony’s head in her lap. Homer caught the look from Mrs. Grogan: that
he should leave. It was not the end of the chapter, not even the end of the
scene, or even of a paragraph. There was more to read; the next line began:

I desired liberty . . .

But it would have been cruel to continue. Jane Eyre had already made her
point. Homer and Melony had already had several such afternoons—those
days that tire you out about your whole life!

This night the air between the girls’ and boys’ division seemed odorless and

void of history. It was simply dark outside.

When he went back to the boys’ division, Nurse Angela told him that John

Wilbur was gone—adopted!

“A nice family,” Nurse Angela told Homer happily. “The father of the

family used to be a bed-wetter. They’re going to be very sympathetic.”

As was Dr. Larch’s habit, when someone was adopted, his routine

benediction to the boys in the darkness was altered slightly. Before he
addressed them as “Princes of Maine,” as “Kings of New England,” he made
an oddly formal announcement.

“Let us be happy for John Wilbur,” Wilbur Larch said. “He has found a

family. Good night, John,” Dr. Larch said, and the boys murmured after him:

“Good night, John!”
“Good night, John Wilbur.”
And Dr. Larch would pause respectfully before saying the usual: “Good

night, you Princes of Maine—you Kings of New England!”

Homer Wells looked at a little of Gray’s Anatomy in the candlelight allowed

him before he tried to go to sleep. It was not just John Wilbur’s peeing that
was missing from the night; something else was gone. It took Homer a while
to detect what was absent; it was the silence that finally informed him. Fuzzy
Stone and his noisy apparatus had been taken to the hospital. Apparently, the
breathing contraption—and Fuzzy—required more careful monitoring, and
Dr. Larch had moved the whole business into the private room, next to
surgery, where Nurse Edna or Nurse Angela could keep a closer eye on
Fuzzy.

It was not until Homer Wells had some experience with dilatation and

curettage that he would know what Fuzzy Stone resembled: he looked like an
embryo—Fuzzy Stone looked like a walking, talking fetus. That was what

was peculiar about the way you could almost see through Fuzzy’s skin, and
his slightly caved-in shape; that was what made him appear so especially
vulnerable. He looked as if he were not yet alive but still in some stage of
development that should properly be carried on inside the womb. Dr. Larch
told Homer that Fuzzy had been born prematurely—that Fuzzy’s lungs had
never adequately developed. Homer would not have a picture of what this
meant until he confronted the few recognizable parts in his first look at the
standard procedure for removing the products of conception.

over.

“Yes,” Homer Wells said.
“I’m not saying it’s right, you understand? I’m saying it’s her choice—it’s a

woman’s choice. She’s got a right to have a choice, you understand?” Larch
asked.

“Right,” said Homer Wells.
When he couldn’t sleep, he thought about Fuzzy Stone. When Homer went

down to the private room, next to surgery, he couldn’t hear the breathing
apparatus. He stood very still and listened; he could always track Fuzzy down
by his sound—lungs, waterwheel and fan—but the silence Homer Wells
listened to made a more startling noise to him than the sound of that snake
hitting the roof while his finger was in Melony’s mouth.

Poor Melony, he thought. She now listened to Jane Eyre as if it were her life

story being told to her, and the only thing she ever said to Homer Wells was to
remind him of his promise. (“You won’t leave here before I do, remember?
You promised.”)

“Where is he?” Homer asked Dr. Larch. “Where’s Fuzzy?”
Dr. Larch was at the typewriter in Nurse Angela’s office, where he was—

very late—almost every night.

“I was thinking of a way to tell you,” Larch said.
“You said I was your apprentice, right?” Homer asked him. “If that’s what I

am, I should be told. If you’re teaching me, you can’t leave anything out.
Right?”

does one mark the passage of time in an orphanage? Why hadn’t Larch
noticed that Homer Wells needed a shave? Why hadn’t Larch taught him to
do that? I am responsible for everything—if I am going to be responsible at
all, Larch reminded himself.

developed properly. He was susceptible to every respiratory infection that I
ever saw.”

Homer was growing up; he was starting the process of holding himself
responsible for things. That photograph had upset Fuzzy Stone; there was
nothing Homer, or even Dr. Larch, could have done for Fuzzy’s lungs, but the
photograph hadn’t been necessary.

“What are you going to tell the little ones?” Homer asked Dr. Larch.
Wilbur Larch looked at Homer; God, how he loved what he saw! Proud as a

father, he had trouble speaking. His affection for Homer Wells had virtually
etherized him. “What do you think I should say, Homer?” Dr. Larch asked.

It was Homer’s first decision as an adult. He thought about it very carefully.

In 193_, he was almost sixteen. He was beginning the process of learning how
to be a doctor at a time when most boys his age were learning how to drive a
car. Homer had not yet learned how to drive a car; Wilbur Larch had never
learned how to drive a car.

usually tell them. You should tell them that Fuzzy has been adopted.”

Wilbur Larch watched Homer carefully. In A Brief History of St. Cloud’s, he

would write, “How I resent fatherhood! The feelings it gives one: they
completely ruin one’s objectivity, they wreck one’s sense of fair play. I worry
that I have caused Homer Wells to skip his childhood—I worry that he has
absolutely skipped being a child! But many orphans find it easier to skip
childhood altogether than to indulge themselves as children when they are
orphans. If I helped Homer Wells to skip his childhood, did I help him skip a
bad thing? Damn the confusion of feeling like a father! Loving someone as a
parent can produce a cloud that conceals from one’s vision what correct
behavior is.” When he wrote that line, Wilbur Larch saw the cloud created in
the photographer’s studio, the cloud that so falsely edged the photograph of
Mrs. Eames’s daughter with the pony; he launched off into a paragraph on
“clouds.” (The terrible weather in inland Maine; “the clouds of St. Cloud’s,”
and so forth.)

Fuzzy Stone had been adopted, Larch knew that Homer was right; there were
no clouds around that decision. The next night, Wilbur Larch followed the
advice of his young apprentice. Perhaps because he was lying, he forgot the
proper routine. Instead of beginning with the announcement about Fuzzy
Stone, he gave the usual benediction; he got the whole business out of order.

“Good night, you Princes of Maine—you Kings of New England!” Dr.

Larch addressed them in the darkness. Then he remembered what he was
supposed to say. “Oh!” he said aloud, in a startled voice that caused one of the
little orphans to leap in his bed in fright.

did not throw up only when confronted with the image of a woman with what
he thought was a pony’s intestines in her mouth.

charged with anxiety. Into this jumpy atmosphere, Larch tried to say the usual
about the unusual. “Let us be happy for Fuzzy Stone,” Dr. Larch said. Homer
Wells knew what was meant when it was said that you could hear a pin drop.
“Fuzzy Stone has found a family,” Dr. Larch said. “Good night, Fuzzy.”

air; it had all been done out of order, and not everyone was completely
convinced.

little voices followed him.

“Good night, Fuzzy!”
“Good night, Fuzzy Stone!”
Homer Wells also knew what was meant when it was said that silence could

be deafening. After Dr. Larch had left them, little Snowy Meadows was the
first to speak.

“Homer?” Snowy said.
“Right here,” said Homer Wells in the darkness.
“How could anyone adopt Fuzzy Stone, Homer?” Snowy Meadows asked.
“Who could do it?” said little Wilbur Walsh.
“Someone with a better machine,” said Homer Wells. “Someone who had a

better breathing machine than the one Doctor Larch built for Fuzzy. It’s a
family that knows all about breathing machines. It’s the family business,” he
added. “Breathing machines.”

“Lucky Fuzzy!” someone said in a wondering voice.
Homer knew he had convinced them when Snowy Meadows said, “Good

night, Fuzzy.”

Homer Wells, not yet sixteen—an apprentice surgeon, a veteran insomniac

—walked down to the river that had carried away so many pieces of the
history of St. Cloud’s. The loudness of the river was a comfort to Homer,
more comforting than the silence in the sleeping room that night. He stood on
the riverbank where the porch to the sawyers’ lodge had been, where he’d
seen the hawk come from the sky more quickly than the snake could swim to
shore—and the snake had been very fast.

was saying good-bye to his own childhood—too soon. But Dr. Larch had
ether to help him sleep, and Homer Wells had no cure for his insomnia.

“Good night, Fuzzy,” Homer said over the river. The Maine woods,

typically, let the remark pass, but Homer insisted that he be heard. “Good
night, Fuzzy!” he cried as loud as he could. And then louder, “Good night,
Fuzzy!” He yelled it and yelled it—the grown-up boy whose crying had once
been a legend upriver in Three Mile Falls.

“Good night, Fuzzy Stone!”

Young Dr. Wells

“In other parts of the world,” wrote Wilbur Larch, “there is what the world
calls ‘society.’ Here in St. Cloud’s we have no society—there are not the
choices, the better-than or worse-than comparisons that are nearly constant in
any society. It is less complicated here, because the choices and comparisons
are either obvious or nonexistent. But having so few options is what makes an
orphan so desperate to encounter society—any society, the more complex with
intrigue, the more gossip-ridden, the better. Given the chance, an orphan
throws himself into society—the way an otter takes to the water.”

What Wilbur Larch was thinking of, regarding “options,” was that Homer

Wells had no choice concerning either his apprenticeship or Melony. He and
Melony were doomed to become a kind of couple because there was no one
else for them to couple with. In society, it would have mattered if they were
suited for each other; that they were not suited for each other didn’t matter in
St. Cloud’s. And since Homer had exhausted the resources of the dismal
tutors employed at St. Cloud’s, what else was there for him to learn if he
didn’t learn surgery? Specifically, obstetrical procedure. And what was far
simpler for Dr. Larch to teach him: dilatation and curettage.

Homer Wells kept his notes in one of Dr. Larch’s old medical school

notebooks; Larch had been a cramped, sparse notetaker—there was plenty of
room. In Larch’s opinion, there was no need for Homer to have a notebook of
his own. Wilbur Larch had only to look around him to see what paper cost.
The trees were gone; they had been replaced by orphans—all for paper.

Under the heading “D&C,” Homer wrote: “The woman is most secure in

stirrups.” In Dr. Larch’s procedure, she was also shaved.

“The VAGINAL area is prepared with an ANTISEPTIC SOLUTION,”

wrote Homer Wells; he did a lot of CAPITALIZING—it was related to his
habit of repeating the ends of sentences, or key words. “The UTERUS is
examined to estimate its size. One hand is placed on the ABDOMINAL

WALL; two or three fingers of the other hand are in the VAGINA. A
VAGINAL SPECULUM, which looks like a duck’s bill, is inserted in the
VAGINA—through which the CERVIX is visible. (The CERVIX,” he wrote
parenthetically, as if to remind himself, “is the necklike part of the lower,
constricted end of the UTERUS.) The hole in the middle of the CERVIX is
the entrance of the UTERUS. It is like a cherry Life Saver. In PREGNANCY
the CERVIX is swollen and shiny.

“With a series of METAL DILATORS, the CERVIX is dilated to admit

entrance of the OVUM FORCEPS. These are tongs with which the doctor
grabs at what’s inside the UTERUS. He pulls what he can out.”

conception,” he called it.

“With a CURETTE,” noted Homer, “the WALL OF THE UTERUS is

scraped clean. One knows when it’s clean when one hears a gritty sound.”

And that’s all that was entered in the notebook concerning dilatation and the

process of curetting. As a footnote to this procedure, Homer added only this:
“The WOMB one reads about in literature is that portion of the GENITAL
TRACT in which the FERTILIZED OVUM implants itself.” A page number
was jotted in the margin of this notebook entry—the page in Gray’s Anatomy
that begins the section “The Female Organs of Generation,” where the most
useful illustrations and descriptions can be found.

By 194_, Homer Wells (not yet twenty) had been a midwife to countless

births and the surgical apprentice to about a quarter as many abortions; he had
delivered many children himself, with Dr. Larch always present, but Larch
had not allowed Homer to perform an abortion. It was understood by both
Larch and Homer that Homer was completely able to perform one, but Larch
believed that Homer should complete medical school—a real medical school
—and serve an internship in another hospital before he undertook the
operation. It was not that the operation was complicated; it was Larch’s
opinion that Homer’s choice should be involved. What Larch meant was that
Homer should know something of society before he made the decision, by
himself, whether to perform abortions or not.

What Dr. Larch was looking for was someone to sponsor Homer Wells.

Larch wanted someone to send the boy to college, not only in order for
Homer to qualify for admission to medical school but also in order to expose
Homer to the world outside St. Cloud’s.

he ask his colleague and correspondent at The New England Home for Little
Wanderers if he could make use of their large mailing list?

ACCOMPLISHED MIDWIFE & QUALIFIED ABORTIONIST

SEEKS SPONSOR FOR COLLEGE YEARS
—PLUS MEDICAL SCHOOL EXPENSES!

Where was the society where Homer Wells could fit in? wondered Wilbur

Larch.

Mainly, Larch knew, he had to get his apprentice away from Melony. The

two of them together: how they depressed Larch! They struck the doctor as a
tired and loveless married couple. What sexual tensions Melony had managed
to conduct between them in the earlier years of their angry courtship seemed
absent now. If they still practiced a sexual exchange, they practiced
infrequently and without enthusiasm. Over lunch they sat together without
speaking, in plain view of the girls’ or of the boys’ divisions; together they
examined the well-worn copy of Gray’s Anatomy as if it were the intricate
map they had to follow if they were ever to find their way out of St. Cloud’s.

Melony didn’t even run away anymore. It appeared to Dr. Larch that some

wordless, joyless pact bound Homer and Melony together. Their sullenness
toward each other reminded Dr. Larch of Mrs. Eames’s daughter, who would
spend eternity with a pony’s penis in her mouth. Melony and Homer never
fought; they never argued; Melony seemed to have given up raising her voice.
If there was still anything sexual between them, Larch knew that it happened
randomly, and only out of the keenest boredom.

Larch even got Melony a job as live-in help for a well-to-do old woman in

Three Mile Falls. It may have been that the woman was a cranky invalid who
would have complained about anyone; she certainly complained about
Melony—she said Melony was “insensitive,” that she was never
“forthcoming” with conversation, and that, in regard to such physical
attentions as helping her in and out of her bath, the girl was “unbelievably
rough.” Dr. Larch could believe it, and Melony herself complained; she said
she preferred to live at St. Cloud’s; if she had to have a job, she wanted one
she could go to and then leave.

“I want to come home at night,” she told Mrs. Grogan and Dr. Larch.

Home? Larch thought.

There was another job, in town, but it required that Melony know how to

drive. Although Dr. Larch even found a local boy to teach Melony, her
driving thoroughly frightened the young man and she needed to take the
driver’s examination for her license three times in order to pass it once. She
then lost the job—delivering parts and tools for a building contractor. She was
unable to account for more than two hundred miles that had accumulated in
one week on the delivery van’s odometer.

“I just drove to places because I was bored,” she told Dr. Larch, shrugging.

“And there was a guy I was seeing, for a couple of days.”

and unadoptable; she had grown dependent on her proximity to Homer Wells,
although whole days passed when there didn’t appear to be a word between
them—in fact, no intercourse beyond mere presence was observable for
weeks in succession (if Melony’s presence could ever be called “mere”).
Because of how much Melony depressed Dr. Larch, Dr. Larch assumed that
her presence was depressing to Homer Wells.

that boy, and he could not imagine enduring a life at St. Cloud’s without him
—but the doctor knew that Homer Wells had to have an authentic encounter
with society if the boy was going to have a chosen life at all. What Larch
dreamed of was that Homer would venture out in the world and then choose
to come back to St. Cloud’s. But who would choose such a thing? Larch
wondered.

Maine had many towns; there wasn’t one as charmless as St. Cloud’s.
Larch lay down in the dispensary and sniffed a little ether. He recalled

Portland’s safe harbor; his mind ticked off the towns, either east or inland
from Portland, and his lips tried the towns with the good, Maine names.

names. There was Kennebunk and Kennebunkport, there was Vassalborough
and Nobleboro and Waldoboro, there was Wiscasset and West Bath,
Damariscotta and Friendship, Penobscot Bay and Sagadahoc Bay, Yarmouth
and Camden, Rockport and Arundel, Rumford and Biddeford and Livermore
Falls.

East of Cape Kenneth, the tourist trap, lies Heart’s Haven; inland from the
small, pretty harbor town that’s called a haven squats the town of Heart’s
Rock. The rock in Heart’s Rock is named for the uninhabited rock island that
appears to float like a dead whale in the otherwise perfect harbor of Heart’s
Haven. It is an eyesore island, unloved by the people of Heart’s Haven;
perhaps they were moved to name the eyesore town of Heart’s Rock after
their bird-beshitted and fish-belly-white rock. Nearly covered at high tide, and
lying fairly flat in the water, it lists slightly—hence its name: Dead Whale
Rock. There is no actual “rock” in Heart’s Rock, which is not a town
deserving to be looked down upon; it is only five miles inland, and from some
of its hills the ocean is visible; in most of the town, the sea breeze is
refreshingly felt.

But compared to Heart’s Haven, every other town is a mongrel. When

condemning Heart’s Rock, the people of Heart’s Haven do not mention the
simple quaintness of the town’s only stores—Sanborn’s General Store and

Titus Hardware and Plumbing. The people of Heart’s Haven are more likely
to mention Drinkwater Lake, and the summer cottages on its murky shores. A
not-very-fresh freshwater lake, more of a pond—because by mid-July the
bottom is cloudy and rank with algae—Drinkwater Lake is Heart’s Rock’s
only offering to summer people. People who summer on Drinkwater Lake
have not traveled far; they may live elsewhere in Heart’s Rock—or, even
more rustically, in Kenneth Corners. The summer camps and cottages that dot
the lakeshore are also used during the hunting-season weekends in the fall.
The cottages and camps have names of a striving wishfulness. Echo’s End,
and Buck’s Last Stand (this one is decked with antlers); there is one called
Endless Weekend, with a floating dock; one called Wee Three, suggesting
inhabitants of an almost unbearable cuteness; and a frank sort of place called
Sherman’s Hole in the Ground, which is an accurate description.

In 194_ Drinkwater Lake was already cluttered, and by 195_ it would

become intolerably busy with powerboats and water skis—propellers fouled
and oars festooned with the slime-green algae stirred up from the bottom. The
lake is too woodsy to let the wind through; sailboats always die on the dead-
calm surface, which is perfect for hatching mosquitoes, and over the years the
accumulated children’s urine and gasoline would give the lake an unwell,
glossy sheen. There are wonderfully remote lakes in Maine, but Drinkwater
Lake was never one of them. The occasional, bewildered canoeist looking for
the wilderness would not find it there. The wild-hearted, departed Winkles
would not have favored the place. You would not willingly drink the water of
Drinkwater Lake, and there are many tiresome jokes on that subject, all
conceived in Heart’s Haven, where the habit of judging Heart’s Rock by its
single, sorry body of water is long-standing.

if there were ever a summer camp for the luckless orphans of St. Cloud’s, it
would be situated in the bog that separates Echo’s End from Sherman’s Hole
in the Ground.

Not all of Heart’s Rock was so ugly. It was a town of stay-put people on fairly
open, neatly farmed land; it was dairy-cow country, and fruit-tree country. In
194_, the Ocean View Orchard on Drinkwater Road, which connected Heart’s
Rock to Heart’s Haven, was pretty and plentiful—even by the standards of the
spoiled and hard-to-please of Heart’s Haven. Although the Ocean View
Orchards were in Heart’s Rock, there was a Heart’s Haven look to the place;
the farmhouse had flagstone patios, the grounds were landscaped with rose
bushes—like the Heart’s Haven homes on the more elegant coast—and the
lawns spreading from the main house to the swimming pool, all the way to the

nearest apple orchard, were kept up and fussed over by the same yard gangs
who made the Heart’s Haven lawns look so much like putting greens.

The owner of Ocean View Orchards, Wallace Worthington, even had a

Heart’s Haven kind of name—meaning, it was not a local-sounding name.
Indeed not, because Wallace Worthington was from New York; he’d fled
investments for apple farming just before everyone’s investments crashed,
and if he didn’t know all there was to know about apples—being a gentleman
farmer, in soul and in bones (and in clothes)—he knew almost everything
about money and had hired the right foremen to run Ocean View (men who
did know apples).

only member whose position on the board was never voted—and the only
Heart’s Rock resident who was a Haven Club member. Since his orchard
employed half the locals of Heart’s Rock, Wallace Worthington had the rare
distinction of being appreciated in both towns.

Wallace Worthington would have reminded Wilbur Larch of someone he

might have met at the Channing-Peabody’s, where Dr. Larch went to perform
his second abortion—the rich people’s abortion, as Larch thought of it.
Wallace Worthington would strike Homer Wells as what a real King of New
England should look like.

with the social histories of the towns—to know that Wallace Worthington’s
wife was not every inch a queen; she certainly looked like a queen and
conducted herself, every inch, as such. But the townspeople knew that Olive
Worthington—although a Heart’s Haven native—had come from the wrong
part of town. Society is so complex that even Heart’s Haven had a wrong part
to it.

Olive Worthington was born Alice Bean; to the knowledgeable, she was

Bruce Bean’s (the clam-digger’s) daughter; she was Bucky Bean’s (the well-
digger’s) clever sister—which falsely implied that Bucky wasn’t clever; he
was at least cleverer than his father, Bruce. Well-digging (the business of
Nurse Angela’s father, the business that yielded Homer Wells a name) was
good-paying work: well-digging beats clam-digging by dollars and by miles,
as they say in Maine.

that leaked ice. Her mother, Maud, never talked; she kept a cracked makeup
mirror on a chopping block at the crowded corner of a kitchen counter—her
cosmetics, which fascinated her, mingled with stray clams. A large clam shell
was her only ashtray. Sometimes the black and gritty skin discarded from the
neck of a cleaned clam clung to a bottle of her Blush-Up. She died of lung

cancer when Olive was still in high school.

became an Olive by altering her own name at the town clerk’s office in
Heart’s Haven. It was a willful, legal change-of-name form that she filled out
—easy to do, in part because it required the changing of only two letters to
make an Alice into an Olive. There was no end to the way the locals liked to
play with the name Olive, as if they were moving around in their mouths the
disagreeable pits of that odd food; and behind her back, there were many who
still called her Alice Bean, though only her brother Bucky would call Olive
Alice to her face. Everyone else respected her enough to say Olive if that’s
what she wanted to hear, and it was agreed that although she married a
Worthington, and therefore had married into apples and money, she had got
no bargain in Wallace.

kind. He adored Olive and everything about her—her gray eyes and her ash-
blond hair turning softly to pearl, and her college-learned New British accent
(which was often imitated at the Haven Club). Her brother Bucky’s success as
a well-digger had paid for Olive’s college accent, without which she might
not have enticed Wallace Worthington to notice her. It may have been
gratitude that caused Olive to tolerate Bucky calling her Alice to her face. She
even tolerated his predictable appearances at Ocean View Orchards—his
boots always muddy with that clay-colored muck from the middle of the
earth, the stuff only well-diggers find. Olive tried not to cringe while he
tromped about the house in those boots, calling her “Alice Baby,” and on hot
summer days he would dive into the swimming pool in all his clothes, leaving
only those middle-earth boots out of the bright water (which he left sloshing
in Atlantic turmoil and clay-colored at the edges). Bucky Bean could leave a
ring on a swimming pool the way a dirty child could ring a bathtub.

in herself, there was something wrong with Wallace Worthington. Despite his
being a real gentleman, and excellent at teasing the Republicans at the Haven
Club, and fair to his orchardmen (he provided them with health insurance
policies at his expense at a time when most farm workers were living below
the standard of minimum everything)—despite Wallace Worthington’s lovable
flamboyance (all the farm and personal vehicles at Ocean View Orchards bore
his monogram on a big, red apple!), despite everything that was grand about
Wallace, he appeared to be drunk all the time, and he exhibited such a childish
quality of hyperactivity and restlessness that everyone in Heart’s Haven and
in Heart’s Rock agreed that he must certainly be no prize to live with.

(which he could not seem to adjust properly) by cutting through it with the
saw blade of his jackknife. He was drunk again at the Haven Club when Dr.
Darryrimple had his stroke; Wallace tossed the old gentleman into the shallow
end of the pool—“to revive him,” he said later. The old fellow nearly
drowned in addition to suffering his stroke, and the offended Darryrimples
were so outraged that they canceled membership. And Wallace was drunk in
his own orchards when he drove his Cadillac headlong into the five-hundred-
gallon Hardie sprayer, dousing himself and his oyster-white convertible with
chemicals that gave him a rash in his lap and permanently bleached the
Cadillac’s scarlet upholstery. He was drunk again when he insisted on driving
the tractor that towed the flatbed with half of Ira Titcomb’s beehives on it,
promptly dumping the load—the honey, the hives, and millions of angry bees
—at the intersection of Drinkwater Road and Day Lane (getting himself badly
stung). Also stung were Everett Taft and his wife, Dot, and Dot’s kid sister,
Debra Pettigrew, who were working in the Day Lane orchard at the time of
the accident.

cynics saying that he was too drunk to get it up with anyone else, and possibly
too drunk to get it up with Olive. It was clear he had gotten it up with her at
least once; he had produced a son, just turning twenty in 194_, as big and
handsome and charming as his father, with his mother’s smoky eyes and with
not quite her former blondness (his was tawny, not ash); he even had a bit of
her New British accent. Wallace Worthington, Junior, was too good-looking
ever to be called Junior (he was called Wally). From the day of Wally’s birth,
Wallace Worthington was called Senior, even by Olive and eventually by
Wally.

Haven and Heart’s Rock. If he had known only this much, Dr. Larch might
have tried to keep Homer Wells away from the place; he might have guessed
that Homer’s life would get complicated there. What did an orphan know
about gossip, or care about class? But to Wilbur Larch Heart’s Haven and
Heart’s Rock were very pretty names, improved by ether.

If Dr. Larch had spent some time around Senior Worthington, Larch might

have figured out that the man was unfairly judged; of course he drank too
much—many people who drink at all drink too much. But Senior was not a
drunk. He bore the classic, clinical features of Alzheimer’s disease, and
Wilbur Larch would have spotted it for what it was—a progressive organic
brain syndrome. Alzheimer’s presenile dementia is marked by deterioration of
intellect, failure of memory and a striking appearance of rapid aging in a
patient in middle life, symptoms that become progressively more severe over

a period of just a few years and terminate in death. Restlessness,
hyperactivity, defective judgment are other hallmarks of the disease. But as
keen as the wit in Heart’s Haven was, the townspeople didn’t know the
difference between drunkenness and Alzheimer’s disease; they were dead-
sure they had the Worthingtons figured out.

They misjudged Olive Worthington, too. She had earned her name. She

might have been desperate to leave the clam level of life, but she knew what
work was; she had seen how quickly the ice in the pickup melted, how short a
time the clams could be kept cool. She knew hustle, she knew know-how. She
saw, instantly, that Wallace Worthington was good about money and weak on
apples, and so she took up apples as her cause. She found out who the
knowledgeable foremen were and she gave them raises; she fired the others,
and hired a younger, more reliable crew. She baked apple pies for the families
of the orchardmen who pleased her, and she taught their wives the recipe, too.
She installed a pizza oven in the apple mart and soon could turn out forty-
eight pies in one baking, adding greatly to the business over the counter at
harvest time—formerly reserved for apple cider and apple jelly. She overpaid
for the damages to Ira Titcomb’s beehives and soon was selling apple blossom
honey over the counter, too. She went to the university and learned everything
about cross-pollination and how to plant a new-tree orchard; she learned more
about mousing, and suckering, and thinning, and the new chemicals than the
foremen knew, and then she taught them.

fading image in the makeup mirror—clams everywhere around her. The little
cotton balls dabbed with cosmetics (the color of the clay on her brother
Bucky’s terrible boots) were flecked with the ashes from the cigarettes
overstuffing the clam-shell ashtray. These images strengthened Olive. She
knew the life she had escaped, and at Ocean View Orchards she more than
earned her keep; she took the farm out of Senior’s careless hands, and she ran
it very intelligently for him.

At night, coming back from the Haven Club (she always drove), Olive

would leave Senior passed out in the passenger seat and put a note on her son
Wally’s pillow, asking him, when he got home, to remember to carry his
father up to bed. Wally always did so; he was a golden boy, not just a picture
of one. The one night that young Wally had drunk too much to carry his father
to bed, Olive Worthington was quick to point out to her son the error of his
ways.

his drunkenness,” she told Wally. “If you resemble him in that aspect, you will
lose this farm—and every penny made by every apple. Do you think your

father could prevent me from doing that to you?”

passenger seat of the Cadillac, now mottled by spraying chemicals. It was
obvious to the boy that Senior Worthington could prevent nothing.

educated and polite (he could have taught tennis and manners at the Haven
Club, and taught them well), but also because he knew his mother, Olive
Worthington, hadn’t “married into” anything more than a little working cash.
The work had been supplied by her; Wilbur Larch would have respected that.

tangential victim of alcoholism and a nearly complete victim of Alzheimer’s
disease.

There are things that the societies of towns know about you, and things that

they miss. Senior Worthington was baffled by his own deterioration, which he
also believed to be the result of the evils of drink. When he drank less—and
still couldn’t remember in the morning what he’d said or done the evening
before; still saw no relenting of his remarkably speeded-up process of aging;
still hopped from one activity to the next, leaving a jacket in one place, a hat
in another, his car keys in the lost jacket—when he drank less and still
behaved like a fool, this bewildered him to such an extreme that he began to
drink more. In the end, he would be a victim of both Alzheimer’s disease and
alcoholism; a happy drunk, with unexplained plunges of mood. In a better,
and better-informed world, he would have been cared for like the nearly
faultless patient that he was.

there was no saving Senior Worthington from what was wrong with him, as
surely as there had been no saving Fuzzy Stone.

In 193_, Homer Wells began Gray’s Anatomy—at the beginning. He began
with osteology, the skeleton. He began with bones. In 194_, he was making
his third journey through Gray’s Anatomy, some of which he shared with
Melony. Melony showed a wayward concentration, though she confessed
interest in the complexity of the nervous system, specifically the description
of the twelfth or hypoglossal nerve, which is the motor nerve of the tongue.

“What’s a motor nerve?” Melony asked, sticking out her tongue. Homer

tried to explain, but he felt tired. He was making his sixth journey through
David Copperfield, his seventh through Great Expectations, his fourth
through Jane Eyre. Only last night he had come to a part that always made
Melony cringe—which made Homer anxious.

It’s near the beginning of Chapter Twelve, when Jane shrewdly observes, “It

is vain to say human beings ought to be satisfied with tranquillity: they must
have action; and they will make it if they cannot find it.”

stay. A promise is a promise.”

line, this time reading it as if he were personally delivering a threat.

must have action; and they will make it if they cannot find it.” Mrs. Grogan
looked taken aback at the ominousness in his voice.

Larch’s; Homer typed it on Nurse Angela’s typewriter, making only a few
mistakes. And when Wilbur Larch was “just resting” in the dispensary, Homer
crept up on the tired saint and placed the piece of paper with the quotation
from Jane Eyre on Dr. Larch’s rising and falling chest. Dr. Larch felt less
threatened by the actual text of the quotation than he felt a general unease:
that Homer knew Dr. Larch’s ether habit so exactly that the boy could
approach his bed undetected. Or am I using a little more of this stuff than I
used to? Larch wondered.

Jane Eyre quotation to Larch’s chest?

“History,” wrote Dr. Larch, “is composed of the smallest, often undetected

mistakes.”

someone added to the original St. Clouds. His point is also illuminated by the
case of the heart in both Heart’s Haven and in Heart’s Rock, a case similar in
error to how Melody became forever a Melony. The explorer credited with the
discovery of the fine, pretty harbor at Heart’s Haven—a seafaring man named
Reginald Hart—was also the first settler of Heart’s Rock to clear land and try
to be a farmer. The general illiteracy of the times, and of the times following
Reginald Hart’s death, prevailed; no one knew of any written difference
between one heart and another. The first settlers of Heart’s Haven and Heart’s
Rock, probably never knowing that Reginald Hart had been given the name
of a deer, quite comfortably named their towns after an organ.

rote, from Gray’s Anatomy, “. . . enclosed in the cavity of the
PERICARDIUM.” By 194_ Homer had looked at each of the hearts in the
three cadavers Dr. Larch had acquired for him (each cadaver outliving its
usefulness for exploratory purposes in about two years’ time).

a related kind—to have his student examining male cadavers. There was
always a problem getting a body (once one was delivered in water that was
supposed to be ice; another had to be disposed of because the embalming
fluid had clearly been old or too weak). Homer remembered the three
cadavers distinctly. It was not until the third body that he developed enough
of a sense of humor to give the body a name; he called her Clara after David
Copperfield’s wimpish mother—that poor, weak woman who’d allowed
herself and young David to be so bullied by the terrible Mr. Murdstone.

sick of Jane Eyre and completely identified with her.

“I could have called her Melony,” Homer responded, but humor was not

reliably to be found in Melony, who preferred to play her own jokes.

him for his first Caesarean section; for that one, he had felt Dr. Larch’s eyes
so riveted to his hands that his hands seemed not his own—they moved with
such smooth purpose that Homer was sure that Dr. Larch had discovered a
way to make that perfect, no-bigger-than-necessary incision in the uterus with
his mind (no need for using hands, at all).

body Homer would call Clara gave Homer his first experience with eclamptic
convulsions—or puerperal convulsions, as they were called in Wilbur Larch’s
days at the Boston Lying-In. At the exact moment that Dr. Larch was at the
railroad station arguing with the stationmaster about the release form for the
unfortunate Clara, Homer Wells was at St. Cloud’s trying to locate, exactly,
the inferior thyroid vein on body number two. Although he didn’t know it, he
had a good excuse for having, momentarily, lost his way; body number two
was wholly shopworn, and many things were hard to locate within it. He
would have consulted his Gray’s in another minute or two, but just then Nurse
Edna burst upon him—shrieking (as she always did when she saw Homer
with body number two; it was as if she’d caught him up to something with
Melony).

agitated, chickenlike fashion before she managed to point Homer in the
direction of the dispensary. He ran there as quickly as he could, finding a
woman lying on the dispensary floor—her eyes staring so wildly and so
steadily unseeing that at first he mistook her for the body he knew Dr. Larch
was trying to liberate from the stationmaster. Then the woman began to move,
and Homer Wells knew she was quite close to becoming a cadaver; the
convulsions began with a twitching in her face, but they spread rapidly
through all the muscles of her frame. Her face, which had been flushed,

turned a shiny blue-black; her heels struck the floor with such force that both
her shoes flew off—Homer saw instantly that her ankles were hugely swollen.
Her jaws were set; her mouth and chin were wet with a frothy spittle, laced
with blood because she’d bitten her tongue—which was at least preferable to
her swallowing it. Her respiration was hardworking; she expelled air with a
hiss, and the spray splashed Homer’s face with a violence he’d not felt since
he stood back from the bank and watched the Winkles being swept away.

Dr. Larch had told him that the word refers to the flashes of light a patient
sees at the onset of the puerperal convulsions. With any sensible prenatal care,
Homer knew, eclampsia was usually avoidable. There was an easily detected
rise in blood pressure, the presence of albumin in the urine, swelling of the
feet and hands, headaches, vomiting, and of course those spots and flashes in
the eyes. Bed rest, diet, reduction of fluid intake, and free catharsis usually
worked; but if they didn’t, the bringing on of premature labor almost always
prevented the convulsions and often produced a living baby.

But the patients Dr. Larch saw were not women who sought or even

understood prenatal care. This patient was very last-minute—even by the
standards of Dr. Larch’s practice.

“Someone has to get him. You and Nurse Angela should stay to help me.”

woman’s moist, cold skin and was reminded of body number one and body
number two (the latter, he recalled, had been left on the examining table in the
room now used for his anatomical studies, near the boys’ division kitchen). In
the last century, Homer Wells knew, a doctor would have given this patient an
ether anesthesia and would have dilated the mouth of the womb to effect a
forcible delivery—a method that usually caused the patient’s death.

with doses of digitalis, which helped prevent the development of fluid in the
lungs. Homer listened to the woman’s watery breathing and realized he might
be too late, even if he correctly remembered the procedure. He knew that one
had to be conservative with eclampsia; if he was forced to deliver the woman
prematurely, he must allow the labor to develop as naturally as possible. The
woman just then moaned; her head and heels whacked the operating table in
unison, her pregnant belly seemed to levitate—and one of her arms, without
will, without purposeful direction, flew up and hit Homer in the face.

He knew that sometimes a woman had only one puerperal convulsion; it was

recorded that a few patients had survived as many as a hundred. What Homer
didn’t know, of course, was whether he was observing this woman’s second

convulsion or her ninetieth.

instructed the nurses to administer morphine to the patient; Homer himself
injected some magnesium sulphate into a vein, to lower her blood pressure at
least temporarily. In the interval between her last and what Homer knew
would be her next convulsion, he asked Nurse Edna to take a urine sample
from the woman and he asked Nurse Angela to examine the specimen for
traces of albumin. He asked the woman to tell him how many convulsions she
had already suffered; but although the woman was coherent and could even
answer questions intelligently, she couldn’t pinpoint the number of
convulsions. Typically, she remembered nothing of the convulsions
themselves—only their onset and their draining aftereffects. She estimated
she was at least a month away from expecting her baby.

sedation, hoping he might reduce the violence of the fit. This fit was different
in character from the last, though Homer doubted it was any less violent; the
woman’s motion was slower, but—if anything—more powerful. Homer lay
across her chest, but her body abruptly jackknifed—lifting him off the
operating table. In the next interval, while the woman was still relaxed under
the ether sedation, Homer’s investigations showed him that the neck of the
patient’s womb was not shortened, its mouth was not dilated; labor hadn’t
begun. He contemplated beginning it, prayed that he wouldn’t have to make
this decision, wondered why it was taking so long to find Dr. Larch.

station; he returned with a thick rivulet of snot in each nostril and strung
across one cheek, like a welt from a whiplash. His name (Nurse Angela’s, of
course) was Curly Day, and he wetly announced that Dr. Larch had boarded
the train to Three Mile Falls—in order to chase down and capture the body
that the stationmaster (in a pique of perversity prompted by religious outrage)
had forwarded to the next stop. The stationmaster had simply refused to
accept the cadaver. Larch, in a rage now surpassing the stationmaster’s, had
taken the next train after it.

“Oh-oh,” Nurse Edna said.
Homer gave his patient her first dose of digitalis; he would repeat this

periodically until he could see its effects on the woman’s heartbeat. While he
waited with the woman for her next seizure, he asked her if she had decided
to put her baby up for adoption, or if she had come to St. Cloud’s only
because it was the nearest hospital—in short, was this a baby she very much
wanted, or one she didn’t want?

“You mean it’s going to die?” the woman asked.

thought was that it was likely the baby would die if he didn’t deliver it soon,
and likely the woman would die if he rushed the delivery.

in her life to bring her, and that she didn’t want to keep the baby—but that she
wanted it, very much, to live.

“Right,” Homer said, as if this decision would have been his own.
“You seem kinda young,” the woman said. “I’m not going to die, am I?” she

asked.

“That’s right, you’re not,” said Homer Wells, using Dr. Larch’s smile again;

it at least made him look older.

was arching her body on the operating table, suffering what was her seventh
seizure, Homer Wells could not remember the exact expression that produced
the reassuring smile.

and he said, “I’m going to start her labor. I’m going to rupture the bag of
waters.”

imitation of Dr. Larch’s confidence-inspiring smile was very poor.

Wells would never remember the exact number of convulsions the woman
experienced in that time. He was beginning to worry more about Dr. Larch
than about the woman, and he had to fight down his fear of something
happening to Dr. Larch in order to concentrate on his job.

Another ten hours after the onset of the woman’s contractions, she delivered

herself of a boy—four pounds, eleven ounces, in good condition. The
mother’s improvement was rapid—as Homer had expected. There were no
more convulsions, her blood pressure returned to normal, the traces of
albumin in her urine were minimal.

In the evening of the day after the morning when he had gone to the station

to retrieve the body that the stationmaster would neither keep nor relinquish,
Wilbur Larch—together with the rescued cadaver soon to be called Clara—
returned tired and triumphant to St. Cloud’s. He had followed the body to
Three Mile Falls, but the stationmaster there had registered such horror that
the body was never unloaded from the train; it had traveled on, and Larch had
traveled after it, arriving at the next, and at the next station, always a train
behind. No one wanted Clara, except to put her in the ground, and it was
thought that this should not be the responsibility of a stationmaster—who
would surely not accept, at his station, a body that no one came forward for.

Clara was a body clearly not intended for the ground. The unearthly sloshing
sound of the embalming fluid, the leathery skin, the outer-space colors of the
occasionally exposed arteries and veins—“Whatever that is, I don’t want it
here,” said the stationmaster in Three Mile Falls.

East Moxie—on and on. Larch got in a terrible row with the stationmaster in
Harmony, Maine, where Clara had stopped for a few minutes—giving the
railroad personnel the fright of their lives—before she’d been sent on.

for the instruction of a student of medicine who is training with me in my
hospital in Saint Cloud’s. It’s mine!” Larch yelled. “Why are you sending it in
the wrong direction? Why are you sending it away from me?”

“It came here, didn’t it?” the stationmaster said. “It didn’t get taken at Saint

Cloud’s, it appears to me.”

“The stationmaster in Saint Cloud’s is crazy!” Larch hollered; he gave a

little hop—a little jump, which made him appear a little crazy, too.

know is, the body come here and I sent it on.”

“For Christ’s sake, it’s not haunted!” Larch said with a wail.
“Didn’t say it was,” said the stationmaster. “Maybe it is, maybe it isn’t—

wasn’t here long enough to tell.”

didn’t stop), Wilbur Larch screamed out the window at a couple of potato
farmers who were waving at the train. “Maine is full of morons!” he yelled,
riding on.

damn body was going. “Bath, I suppose,” the Skowhegan stationmaster said.
“That’s where it came from, and if nobody wants it at the other end, that’s
where it’s going back to.”

it.”

Bath; a woman who was a willing body-donor had died, and the pathologist at
Bath Memorial Hospital knew that Wilbur Larch was looking for a fresh
female.

for Maine, and the stationmaster simply saw that the body was going the
wrong way. “Of course it’s going the wrong way!” Wilbur Larch cried.

“Damndest thing,” the stationmaster said. “Don’t they speak English up in

your parts?”

every damn one of those towns—one a day!”

wondering how “riled up” Dr. Larch was going to get.

On the long ride back to St. Cloud’s with Clara, Dr. Larch didn’t calm down.

In each of the towns that offended him—in Harmony, especially, but in East
Moxie and in Moxie Gore, and in all the rest of them, too—he offered his
opinions to the respective stationmasters while the train paused at the stations.
“Moronville,” he told the stationmaster in Harmony. “Tell me one thing that’s
harmonious here—one thing!”

stationmaster said.

“Moronville!” Larch shouted out the window as the train pulled away.

“Idiotsburg!”

stationmaster was not there. “Lunch,” someone told Dr. Larch, but it was
early evening.

“Perhaps you mean supper?” Dr. Larch asked. “Perhaps the stationmaster

doesn’t know the difference,” he said nastily; he hired the help of two louts to
lug Clara up the hill to the boys’ division.

number two. In the excitement of the emergency, Homer had forgotten to put
body number two away, and Larch ordered the two oafs to carry Clara in there
—not preparing the simpletons for the shopworn cadaver exposed on the
table. One of the clods ran into a wall. Terrible crying out and jumping
around! Larch went shouting through the orphanage, looking for Homer.

Maine—and you leave a mess like that just lying out in the open where any
fool can fall upon it! Homer!” Dr. Larch yelled. “Goddamn it,” he muttered to
himself, “there is no way a teen-ager is going to be an adult ahead of his own,
good time—no way you can expect a teen-ager to accept adult
responsibilities, to do an adult’s Goddamn job!” He went muttering all over
the boys’ division, looking for Homer Wells, but Homer had collapsed on
Larch’s white-iron bed in the dispensary and had fallen into the deepest sleep.
The aura of ether surrounding that spare bed under that eastern window might
have enhanced Homer’s drowsiness, but he scarcely needed ether to sleep; he
had been up for nearly forty hours with the eclampsia patient—delivering her
and her child.

wake him up.

least bit interested in where in Hell I’ve been? And why has that boy left his
body looking like a war casualty? I go away overnight and just look at this
place.”

case of puerpural convulsions she’d ever seen, and she had seen some—in her
time. Wilbur Larch had seen some, too. In his days at the Boston Lying-In,
he’d lost a lot of women to eclampsia, and even in 194_, about a quarter of
the deaths in childbirth were credited to these convulsions.

“Homer did this?” Larch asked Nurse Angela and Nurse Edna; he was

reading the report; he had examined the mother, who was fine, and the
premature baby boy, who was normal and healthy.

can be real proud of him.”

“He is an angel, in my opinion,” Nurse Angela said.
“He looked a little grim when he had to break the water,” Nurse Edna

remembered, “but he did everything just right.”

“He was as sure as snow,” Nurse Angela said.
He did almost everything right, Wilbur Larch was thinking; it really was

amazing. Larch thought it was a slight error that Homer had failed to record
the exact number of convulsions in the second twelve-hour period (especially
after correctly counting them in the first twelve hours), and Homer had not
mentioned the number or the severity of the convulsions (or if there were any)
in the ten-hour period after the patient’s labor contractions began and before
she delivered. Minor criticism. Wilbur Larch was a good teacher; he knew
that this criticism was better withheld. Homer Wells had performed all the
hard parts correctly; his procedure had been perfect.

bed, she was exhausted; in her dreams she would mingle Homer’s heroism
with her already considerable love for Larch; she would sleep very well.
Nurse Angela was still up, in her office, and when Dr. Larch asked her why
the premature baby had not been named, she told Larch that it was Nurse
Edna’s turn and Nurse Edna had been too tired.

want it named. It won’t kill you to go out of turn, will it?”

and the mother. Homer Wells should name this one, Nurse Angela said.

wonderful creation.

faced with naming body number three and his first orphan. He would name
the new body Clara, and what else could he have named a baby boy except
David Copperfield? He was reading Great Expectations at the time and he
preferred Great Expectations to David Copperfield as a book. But he would
not name anyone Pip, and he didn’t care for the character of Pip as much as
he cared for little David. It was an easy decision, and he woke that morning
very refreshed and capable of more demanding decisions than that one.

bed, aware that Dr. Larch was back; Larch was in the room, probably looking
at him, but Homer kept his eyes closed. He somehow knew Larch was there
because of the sweet scent of ether, which Larch wore like cologne, and
because of the steadiness of Larch’s breathing. Then he felt Larch’s hand—a
doctor’s hand, feeling for fever—pass very lightly over his forehead. Homer
Wells, not yet twenty—quite accomplished in obstetrical procedure and as
knowledgeable as almost any doctor on the care of “the female organs of
generation”—lay very still, pretending to sleep.

heard Larch whisper, “Good work, Homer.” He felt a second, even lighter
kiss. “Good work, my boy,” the doctor said, and then left him.

remembered crying the last time he had cried—when Fuzzy Stone had died
and Homer had lied about Fuzzy to Snowy Meadows and the others. He cried
and cried, but he never made a sound; he would have to change Dr. Larch’s
pillowcase in the morning, he cried so much. He cried because he had
received his first fatherly kisses.

had. And Nurse Edna and Nurse Angela had kissed him silly, but they kissed
everyone. Dr. Larch had never kissed him before, and now he had kissed him
twice.

could be, and he cried because he doubted that Wilbur Larch would ever do it
again—or would have done it, if he’d thought Homer was awake.

Dr. Larch went to marvel at the good health of the eclampsia patient and at

her thriving, tiny child—who, in the morning, would become the orphan
David Copperfield (“David Copperfield, Junior,” Dr. Larch would enjoy
saying). Then Larch went to the familiar typewriter in Nurse Angela’s office,
but he couldn’t write anything. He couldn’t even think, he was so agitated
from kissing Homer Wells. If Homer Wells had received his first fatherly
kisses, Dr. Larch had given the first kisses he had ever given—fatherly, or
otherwise—since the day in the Portland boardinghouse when he caught the

clap from Mrs. Eames. And the kisses he gave to Mrs. Eames were more in
the nature of explorations than they were gifts of love. Oh God, thought
Wilbur Larch, what will happen to me when Homer has to go?

Where he would go was hardly a place of comparable excitement, of
comparable challenge, of comparable sadness, of comparable gloom; but
where he would go was nice, and what would Homer Wells, with his
background, make of nice? Wouldn’t it simply seduce him? Wouldn’t anyone
rather have nice?

What did Heart’s Haven or Heart’s Rock know of trouble, and what did

anyone do there to be of use?

Yes, Olive Worthington suffered her brother Bucky’s intrusions—his well-

digging slime in her swimming pool and his trekking across her rugs. Big
deal. Yes, Olive worried if young Wally would have gumption, if he would
really learn and contribute to the apple-growing business—or would the
pretty boy become, like Senior, a good-timer turning pathetic? But what were
these worries compared to the business of St. Cloud’s? Compared to the
Lord’s work and the Devil’s work, weren’t these concerns trivial? Wasn’t life
in nice places shallow?

But trouble can come to nice places, too; trouble travels, trouble visits.

Trouble even takes holidays from the places where it thrives, from places like
St. Cloud’s. The trouble that visited Heart’s Haven and Heart’s Rock was a
fairly trivial and common form of trouble; it began, as trouble often does,
with falling in love.

“Here in St. Cloud’s,” wrote Wilbur Larch, “I don’t imagine that anyone

falls in love; it would be too evident a luxury, to fall in love here.” Larch
didn’t know that Nurse Edna had been in love with him from day one, but he
was correct in supposing that it hadn’t been exactly love that passed between
Melony and Homer Wells. And what clung to each of them after the first
passion had passed was surely not love. And that picture of Mrs. Eames’s
daughter with the pony’s penis in her mouth: that photograph was the oldest
resident of St. Cloud’s—and surely it had no love in it. That picture was as far
from love as Heart’s Haven and Heart’s Rock were from St. Cloud’s.

“In other parts of the world,” wrote Wilbur Larch, “I imagine that people fall

in love all the time.”

If not all the time, a lot. Young Wally Worthington, for example, thought

he’d been in love twice before he was twenty, and once when he was twenty-
one; now, in 194_ (he was just three years older than Homer Wells), Wally
fell full-force in love for the fourth time. He didn’t know that this time would
be for keeps.

daughter; he was no ordinary lobsterman, and it was no surprise to anyone
that he had an extraordinary daughter. Raymond Kendall was so good at
lobstering that other lobstermen, through binoculars, watched him pull and
bait a pot. When he changed his mooring lines, they changed theirs. When he
didn’t go to sea but stayed at home, or at his dock mending pots, they stayed
home, too, and mended theirs. But they couldn’t match him; he had so many
pots in the water that his personalized black and orange buoys gave the
Heart’s Haven harbor the razzle-dazzle of collegiate competition. Once a
contingent of Yale men from the Haven Club beseeched Raymond Kendall to
change his colors to blue and white, but Kendall only muttered that he didn’t
have time for games. Other contingents from the Haven Club would beseech
him; the subject was rarely the color of his lobster buoys.

The Haven Club faced the far jetty of Heart’s Haven Harbor, where

Raymond Kendall’s lobster pound and dock were long established. Kendall
lived above the pound, which might have enticed a more superficial man to
comply with the Haven Club’s requests that he beautify his immediate
environs. His establishment was considered, by summer people’s standards,
an eyesore on a harborfront of otherwise natural and/or expensively groomed
beauty. Even his bedroom window was hung with buoys in various stages of
repainting. The lobster pots undergoing repairs were piled so high on his dock
that it was impossible, from shore, to see if boats were moored on the far side
of the dock. The parking lot for the lobster pound was nearly full—and not of
customers’ cars (there was never enough room for the customers); it was full
of the various trucks and cars that Raymond Kendall was “working on,” and
full of the vast and oily inboard engines for his lobster boats.

teeming with a messy mechanic’s condition of total overhaul; everything was
in progress, incomplete, dismantled, still wet, waiting for parts—and, for
noise, there were the constant grinding sounds of the generator that ran the
water tanks for the lobsters in the pound and the greasy belching of an
inboard engine idling at the dock. And then there was the smell: of tarred
rope, of that slightly-different-from-fishy fishiness that a lobster has, of the
fuel and motor oil that slicked the ocean at his dock (which was matted with
seaweed, studded with periwinkles, festooned with yellow oilskin suits hung
out to dry). Raymond Kendall lived his work; he liked his work in evidence
around him; the jetty end of Heart’s Haven Harbor was his artist’s studio.

He was not just an artist with lobster, he also was an expert at fixing things

was ashamed of it, but he was prouder of his qualities as a mechanic. “I’m
just a tinkerer,” he liked to say.

And if the Haven Club complained about the constant evidence of his

tinkering, which they strongly felt tarnished their splendid view, they didn’t
complain too much; Raymond Kendall fixed what belonged to them, too. For
example, he repaired the filter system for their swimming pool—in the days
when no one had pools, when no one else would have touched it and Ray
Kendall himself had never seen a filter system before. “I suppose it just does
what you’d think it should,” he said, taking ten minutes with the job.

food, which he threw overboard or off the end of his dock. “Just feeding the
lobsters, which feed me,” he would say to anyone who complained. “Just
feeding the sea gulls, who are hungrier than you and me.”

It was rumored he had more money than Senior Worthington; there was

almost no evidence of his spending any—except on his daughter. Like the
children of the Haven Club members, she went to a private boarding school;
and Raymond Kendall paid the considerable annual dues for a Haven Club
membership—not for himself (he went to the club only on request: to fix
things) but for his daughter, who’d learned to swim in the heated pool there,
and who’d taken her tennis lessons on the same courts graced by young Wally
Worthington. Kendall’s daughter had her own car, too—it looked out of place
in the Haven Club parking lot. It was a lobster-pound-parking-lot sort of car, a
mishmash of the parts that were still serviceable from other cars; one of its
fenders was unpainted and was attached with wires; it had a Ford insignia on
its hood and a Chrysler emblem on the trunk, and the passenger-side door was
sealed completely shut. However, its battery never went dead in the Haven
Club lot; it was never this relic that wouldn’t start; when one of the Haven
Club members had a car that wouldn’t start, he went looking for Raymond
Kendall’s daughter, who kept jumper cables in her sturdy wreck and had been
taught by her father how to use them.

hoard, was paid him as salary by Olive Worthington; in addition to his
lobstering, Ray Kendall kept the vehicles and machinery of the Ocean View
Orchards running. Olive Worthington paid him a full foreman’s salary
because he knew almost as much about apples as he knew about lobsters (and
he was indispensable as the farm’s mechanic), but Ray refused to work more
than two hours a day. He picked his own two hours, too—sometimes coming
first thing, saying it was a bad time to go to sea, and sometimes showing up at
the end of the workday, just in time to hear the orchardmen’s complaints
about what was wrong with the nozzle of the Hardie or with the pump of the

Bean sprayer, or what was plugged in the carburetor of the Deere tractor, or
out of tune with the International Harvester. He saw instantly what was
crooked in the mower blades, fucked up in the forklift, jammed in the
conveyor, dead in the pickup, or out of alignment in the cider mill. Raymond
Kendall did in two hours what another mechanic would have spent a day
doing a half-assed job of, and he almost never came to Olive and told her that
she had to get a new this or a new that.

replaced.

would politely ask him. “Would you recommend its replacement?”

But Raymond Kendall was a surgeon among tinkerers—he had a doctor’s

hearty denial of death—and he found replacing something an admission of
weakness, of failure. He would almost always say, “Well, now, Olive—if I
fixed it before, I can fix it again. I can always just go on fixing it.”

their own work and had “no capacity for work of any kind, anyhow.” She
agreed with him completely, and she also appreciated that he never included
in his contempt either Senior or her father, Bruce Bean. Besides, Senior
Worthington knew enough about managing money with his left hand that he’d
been very successful without working more than an hour a day—usually on
the telephone.

weather even at blossom time.” By which she meant wind; a stiff offshore
breeze would keep Ira Titcomb’s bees in their hives, and the wild bees would
be blown back into the woods, where they pollinated everything but apple
trees. “The crop can even survive a bad harvest,” Olive said. She might have
meant rain, when the fruit is slippery, gets dropped, gets bruised, is then good
only for cider; or even a hurricane, which is a real danger for a coastal
orchard. “The crop could even survive something happening to me,” Olive
claimed—at which modesty both Senior Worthington and young Wally would
voice protest. “But what the crop could never survive,” Olive would say, “is
losing Ray Kendall.” She meant that without Raymond nothing would work,
or that they’d have to buy new everything, which soon wouldn’t work any
better than the old stuff that only Ray could keep running.

Heart’s Rock could survive without Raymond Kendall.”

Olive to look tragic and inspiring young Wally to change the subject.

Despite the fact that Ray Kendall worked two hours every day at Ocean

View, he was never seen to eat an apple; only rarely did he eat lobster (he
preferred chicken or pork chops, or even hamburger). During a Haven Club
regatta, several sailors claimed that they could smell Ray Kendall frying
hamburger aboard his lobster boat while he was pulling in his pots.

But whatever legend of the work ethic Ray represented, and whatever

griping was done on account of the evidence of his work with which
Raymond Kendall preferred to surround himself, no fault could be found with
his beautiful daughter—except the fault of her name, which was not her fault
(who would ever have named herself a Candice, and therefore been a Candy
to all?) and which everyone knew had been the name of her dead mother, and
therefore was not the mother’s fault, either. Candice “Candy” Kendall was
named after her mother, who had died in childbirth. Raymond had named his
daughter in memory of his departed wife, whom everyone had liked and who,
in her day, had kept the environs of the lobster pound and the dock slightly
better picked up. Who could find fault with any name that was given out of
love?

but never falsely sweet; she was a great and natural beauty, but no crowd-
pleaser. She had daily reliability written all over her, she was at once friendly
and practical—she was courteous, energetic, and substantial in an argument
without ever being shrill. She complained only about her name, and she was
always good-humored about it (she would never hurt her father’s feelings—or
anyone else’s feelings, willingly). She appeared to combine her father’s
enraptured embrace of the work ethic with the education and the refinements
he had allowed her—she took to both labor and sophistication with ease. If
other girls at the Haven Club (or in the rest of Heart’s Haven and Heart’s
Rock) were jealous of the attention young Wally Worthington gave to her,
there was still no one who disliked her. If she’d been born an orphan, even at
St. Cloud’s, half the population there would have fallen in love with her.

Even Olive Worthington liked her, and Olive was suspicious of the girls who

dated Wally; she questioned what they wanted from him. She could never
forget how much she had wanted to get out of her life and into a
Worthington’s green and apple-bright existence at Ocean View, and this
memory of her younger self gave Olive an eye for girls who might be more
interested in the Ocean View life than they were interested in Wally. Olive
knew this wasn’t the case with Candy, who seemed to think that her own life
above Ray Kendall’s crawling, live-lobster pound was perfect; she was as
fond of her father’s orneriness as she was deservedly proud of his industry.
She was well cared for by the latter. She wasn’t looking for money, and she
preferred taking Wally for an ocean swim—off her father’s treacherous and

crowded dock—to swimming in the Haven Club pool or in the Worthingtons’
private swimming pool, where she knew she was welcome. In truth, Olive
Worthington thought that Candy Kendall might be too good for her son,
whom she knew to be rather unsettled, or at least not industrious—she would
grant you he was charming and genuinely good-natured.

of her mother, Maud (frozen among her cosmetics and clams): Olive envied
Candy her perfect love of her mother (whom she’d never seen); the girl’s
absolute goodness made Olive feel guilty for how much she despised her own
origins (her mother’s silence, her father’s failure, her brother’s vulgarity).

constructed—there were actual altarpieces assembled—all over the upstairs
rooms of the lobster pound, where they lived above the gurgle of the lobster
tank. And everywhere were gathered the photographs of Candy’s young
mother, many taken with Candy’s young father (who was so unrecognizably
youthful, whose smile was so unrecognizably constant in the pictures that
Candy looked at Ray, at times, as if he were as much a stranger to her as her
mother).

had a sunny spirit, she’d kept on top of everything, she’d had the boundless
energy that Raymond Kendall possessed for his work and Candy had in
abundance for everything. On the coffee table, in the kitchen, alongside a
disassembled magneto case and ignition system (for the Evinrude), was a
triptych of pictures of Ray and Candice at their wedding, which had been the
only time Ray Kendall had attended an event at the Haven Club when he was
not dressed to repair something.

In Ray’s bedroom, on the night table, next to the broken toggle-switch to the

Johnson (the inboard Johnson; there was an outboard, too), was a picture of
Candice and Ray—both in their oilskin slickers, both pulling pots, on a rough
sea (and it was clear to anyone, especially to Candy, that Candice was
pregnant and hard at work).

had been Candy’s age (which was Homer Wells’s age, exactly): young
Candice Talbot, of the Heart’s Haven Talbots—the longstanding Haven Club
Talbots. She was in a long white dress (for tennis, of all things!), and she
looked just like Candy. The picture was taken the summer she met Ray (an
older boy, strong and dark and determined to fix everything, to make
everything work); if he had seemed a hick, or a little too serious, he was at
least not grim about his ambitions, and alongisde him the boys at the Haven
Club had appeared as court dandies, as spoiled, upper-class fops.

and much darker than her mother’s and than Olive Worthington’s former
blondness. She had her father’s dark skin and dark brown eyes, and her
father’s height. Ray Kendall was a tall man (a disadvantage for a lobsterman,
and for a mechanic, he used to say good-naturedly, because of the strain on
the lower back when pulling lobster pots—there is nearly constant lifting in
that work—and because of a mechanic’s need to crawl under and bend over
things). Candy was extremely tall for a woman, which intimidated Olive
Worthington—just a bit—but was felt by Olive as only a mild flaw in Olive’s
near-perfect satisfaction with Candy Kendall as the correct match for Wally.

Olive Worthington was fairly tall herself (taller than Senior, especially when

Senior was staggering), and she looked in a somewhat unfriendly fashion
upon everyone who was taller than she. Her son, Wally, was taller than she,
too, which Olive still found difficult at times—especially when she desired to
reprimand him.

her voice.

another thing that slightly bothered her about the two of them being together:
they seemed so alike physically. Was their attraction to each other a form of
narcissism? Olive worried. And since each of them was an only child, were
they seeing in each other the brother or sister they always wanted? Wilbur
Larch would have got along with Olive Worthington; she was a born worrier.
Together they could have outworried the rest of the world.

meant the whole rest of the world—the world outside their making. They
were both smart enough to know why they feared this other world so much:
they fully understood that, despite their considerable efforts, they were only
marginally in control of the worlds of their own delicate making.

the summer of 194_, everyone in Heart’s Haven and in Heart’s Rock always
knew they would—it was a wonder only that it had taken them this long to
discover it themselves. For years, both towns had thought them perfect for
each other. Even crusty Raymond Kendall approved. Ray thought Wally was
unfocused, but that was not the same as lazy, and anyone could see the boy
was good-hearted. Ray also approved of Wally’s mother; he had a thorough
liking for the way Olive Worthington respected work.

(they thought) had aged him overnight. “It won’t be long, Alice, before the
guy’s pissing his pants in public,” the charmless Bucky Bean said to Olive.

law. When Candy dreamed of her own mother—grown older than she’d been
allowed to grow in this life; grown naturally older in a better world—she
always thought her mother would have aged to resemble Olive Worthington.
Candy hoped, at least, that her mother would have managed Olive’s
refinement, if not perhaps her college-learned New British. Candy would be
going to college in a year, she assumed, and she had no intentions of learning
an accent there. But except for the accent, Candy thought Olive Worthington
was wonderful; it was sad about Senior, but the man was certainly sweet.

marriage made in heaven as any love affair Heart’s Haven and Heart’s Rock
had seen. It was understood that Wally would finish college first, and that
Candy would be allowed to finish college—if she wanted to—before they got
married. But with Olive Worthington’s instincts for worry, one might have
assumed that Olive would have foreseen the possible causes for a change of
plans. After all, it was 194_; there was a war in Europe; there were many
people who thought that more than Europe would be involved before long.
But Olive had a mother’s wish to keep war out of her mind.

the last war, and he foresaw that if there was another war, it might coincide
with Homer Wells’s being the right age to go. Since that would be the wrong
age to be, the good doctor had already taken some pains to see that Homer
Wells wouldn’t have to go to a war, if there was one.

Larch was, after all, the historian of St. Cloud’s; he wrote the only records

that were kept there; he usually wrote the not-so-simple history of the place
but he had tried his hand at fiction, too. In the case of Fuzzy Stone, for
example—and in the other, very few cases of orphans who had died in his
care—Wilbur Larch hadn’t liked the actual endings, hadn’t wanted to record
the actual outcomes to those small, foreshortened lives. Wasn’t it fair if Larch
took liberties—if he occasionally indulged himself with happy endings?

In the case of the few who had died, Wilbur Larch made up a longer life for

them. For example, the history of F. Stone read like a case study of what
Wilbur Larch wished for Homer Wells. Following Fuzzy’s most successful
adoption (every member of the adoptive family was scrupulously described)
and the most successful treatment and cure imaginable of Fuzzy’s respiratory
difficulties, the young man would pursue an education at none other than
Bowdoin College (Wilbur Larch’s own alma mater) and study medicine at
Harvard Medical School—he would even follow Larch’s footsteps to
internships at Mass General and at the Boston Lying-In. Larch intended to
make a devoted and skilled obstetrician out of Fuzzy Stone; the orphan’s

fictional history was as carefully done as everything Wilbur Larch did—
allowing a possible exception for his use of ether, and Larch was especially
pleased to note that some of his fictional history was more convincing than
what had actually happened to some of the others.

the name of Marsh. Who would believe that a Meadows became a Marsh?
Wilbur Larch was pleased with himself for making up better stories than that.
The Marshes were in the furniture business, and Snowy (who had been
unimaginatively named Robert) would attend the University of Maine only
briefly before marrying some local flower and going into the Marsh family
furniture business as a salesman.

him to drop out of school. “And I really love the furniture business!”

Whenever he wrote to Dr. Larch, Snowy Meadows, alias Robert Marsh,

would always ask, “Say, what’s happened to Homer Wells?” The next thing
you know, Larch thought, Snowy Meadows will suggest a reunion! Larch
grumbled to himself for days, trying to think of what to say to Snowy
Meadows about Homer; he would have liked to brag about Homer’s perfect
procedure with the eclampsia patient, but Larch was aware that his training of
Homer Wells—and the business of the Lord’s work and the Devil’s work in
St. Cloud’s—would not meet with everyone’s approval.

is a sneaky one, Larch concluded—Snowy Meadows also never failed to ask,
in each of his letters, about Fuzzy Stone.

“What’s happening with Fuzzy, these days?” Snowy always asked, and

Wilbur Larch would carefully check the history he had written for Fuzzy—
just to keep Snowy up to date.

convinced that the young furniture salesman, Robert Marsh, was a dogged
sort of fool, who—if he had any of the other orphans’ addresses—would
bother everyone about starting an Orphan Club or an Orphan Society. Larch
even complained to Nurse Edna and to Nurse Angela about Snowy Meadows,
saying, “I wish someone out of Maine had adopted that one, someone far
away. That Snowy Meadows is so stupid, he writes to me as if I ran a
boarding school! The next thing you know, he’ll expect me to publish an
alumni magazine!”

Angela, Larch realized later. These two dear but sentimental ladies would
have jumped at the idea of an alumni magazine; they missed every orphan
they ever gave away. If things were up to them, there would be reunions

planned every year. Every month! Larch thought, and groaned.

had been shrewd enough to make in the history of Homer Wells; he would tell
Homer about it one day, if the situation demanded it. He was very pleased
with himself for this slight fiction that he had so skillfully blended with the
actual history of Homer Wells. Of course, he’d included nothing of the
medical training; he had incriminated himself by what he’d written about the
abortions, many times, but Larch knew well enough that Homer Wells should
be left out of that written history. What Wilbur Larch had written about
Homer Wells was that the boy had a heart defect, a heart that was damaged
and weakened from birth. Larch had even taken the trouble to make this the
first entry about Homer, which necessitated his locating some older-looking
paper and painstakingly revising, and retyping, all the earlier—and actual—
history. But he managed to work in the heart defect in the correctly casual
places. The reference was always vague and uncharacteristically lacking in
medical precision; the words “defect” and “damaged” and “weakened” would
not have convinced a good detective, or even a good doctor, whom Wilbur
Larch imagined he might one day need to convince. In fact, he worried a little
if he could convince Homer of it—given what the boy had learned. But Larch
would face that if and when the situation arose.

Larch, and many others, feared that the war wouldn’t stay there. (“I’m sorry,
Homer,” Larch imagined having to tell the boy. “I don’t want you to worry,
but you have a bad heart; it just wouldn’t stand up to a war.”) What Larch
meant was that his own heart would never stand up to Homer Wells’s going to
war.

with history, a field wherein he was an admitted amateur, but it was
nonetheless a field that he respected and also loved. (In an earlier entry in the
file on Homer Wells—an entry that Dr. Larch removed, for it lent an incorrect
tone of voice, or at least a tone of voice unusual for history—Dr. Larch had
written: “I love nothing or no one as much as I love Homer Wells. Period.”)

Thus Wilbur Larch was more prepared for how a war could change

important plans than Olive Worthington was prepared for it. The other and
more probable cause for a change in the wedding plans of her son and Candy
Kendall—another way in which the young lovers’ plans could be changed—
had been foreseen by Olive. It was an unwanted pregnancy. A pity that it was
not foreseen by either Candy or Wally.

been distressed (had she known), but she wouldn’t have been surprised.
Getting pregnant would never have surprised Wilbur Larch, who knew that it
happened, and happened by accident, all the time. But Candy Kendall and
Wally Worthington, so full of beauty and of the moment and of their own
rightness for each other, simply couldn’t believe it. They were not the sort of
people who would have been ashamed or unable to tell their parents; they
were simply stunned at the prospect of having to derail their perfect plans—of
having to get married ahead of schedule.

orchard? Of course not. Did Candy Kendall need to go to college at all? She
didn’t. Wouldn’t she refine herself, and educate herself, if left to her own
means? Of course she would! And Wally wasn’t much of a student, anyway,
was he? Of course he wasn’t. He was a botany major, but only at the
insistence of his mother—Olive thought that the study of plants might
stimulate her son to become more excited and more knowledgeable about
apple-growing.

we? Do you feel ready?”

had not cried a single tear at the surprising discovery that she was with child
—loved him, too.

“But it’s just not the right time for us, is it, Wally?” Candy asked him.
“I want to marry you, anytime,” he said truthfully, but he added something

that she hadn’t thought of. He had thought of the war in Europe, even if his
mother had missed it. He said, “What if there’s a war—I mean, what if we get
involved in it?”

“What if what?” said Candy, truly shocked.
“I mean, if we were at war, I’d go—I’d have to, I’d want to,” Wally said.

“Only, if there was a child, it wouldn’t feel right—going to a war.”

“When would it feel right to go to a war, Wally?” Candy asked him.
“Well, I mean, I’d just have to, that’s all—if we had one,” he said. “I mean,

it’s our country, and besides, for the experience—I couldn’t miss it.”

You’d want to go to war for the experience!”

“Well, not if we had a child—that’s when it wouldn’t feel right,” Wally said.

“Would it?” He was about as innocent as rain, and about as thoughtless.

she had slapped him. She put her hand very softly where his cheek was so red.
“With or without a child, what would it be like for me if you went to a war?”

“Well, it’s all ‘What if,’ isn’t it?” Wally asked. “It’s just something to think

about,” he added. “About the business of the child, especially—I think. If you
see what I mean,” he said.

“I think we should try not to have the baby,” Candy told him.
“I won’t have you going to one of those places where there’s no real doctor,”

Wally said.

“Of course not,” she agreed. “But aren’t there any real doctors who do it?”
“It’s not what I’ve heard,” Wally admitted. He was too much of a gentleman

to tell her what he’d heard: that there was a butcher in Cape Kenneth who did
you for five hundred dollars. You went to a parking lot and put a blindfold
around yourself and waited; you went alone. Someone picked you up and
took you to the butcher; you were brought back when the butcher was through
—you were blindfolded throughout. And what was worse, you had to appear
absolutely hysterical in front of some fairly dignified and local doctor before
the doctor would even tell you where the parking lot was and how you got in
contact with the butcher. If you didn’t act upset enough, if you weren’t
completely crazy, the doctor wouldn’t put you in touch with the butcher.

Candy. He doubted if Candy could act upset enough, anyway. Wally would
have the baby instead of any of that; he’d marry Candy and be happy about it,
too; it was what he wanted, one day, anyway.

The story Wally had heard was partially true. You did have to go to the fairly

dignified and local doctor, and you did have to work yourself up into a frenzy,
and if the doctor thought you were ready to drown yourself, only then would
he tell you the location of the parking lot and how to approach the butcher.
What Wally didn’t know was the more human part of the story. If you were
calm and collected and well-spoken and obviously sane, the doctor would
skip the whole story about the parking lot and the butcher; if you looked like a
reasonable woman—someone who wouldn’t turn him in, later—the doctor
would simply give you an abortion, right there in his office, for five hundred
dollars. And if you acted like a nut, he also gave you an abortion—right there
in his office—for five hundred dollars. The only difference was that you had
to stand around blindfolded in a parking lot and think that you were being
operated on by a butcher; that’s what acting crazy got you. What was
decidedly unjust, in either case, was that the doctor charged five hundred
dollars.

doctor, or that so-called butcher. He hoped to get advice about another
abortionist, somewhere, and he had a vague plan concerning the people he’d
ask. There was little point in seeking the advice of the members of the Haven
Club; he’d been told that one member had actually taken a cruise to Sweden

for an abortion, but that was out of the question for Candy.

have need of a less extravagant remedy; he also knew that they liked him and
that, with few exceptions, they could be trusted to keep what Wally thought
was a reliable, manly confidence about the matter. He went first to the only
bachelor on the orchard crew, supposing that bachelors (and this one was also
a notorious ladies’ man) might have more use for abortionists than married
men. Wally approached a member of the apple crew named Herb Fowler, a
man only a few years older than Wally—he was good-looking in a too-thin,
too-cruel kind of way, with a too-thin moustache on his dark lip.

during the times of the year when the apple mart was open, she worked with
the other mart women. She was younger than Herb, just a local girl, about
Candy’s age—her name was Louise Tobey, and the men called her Squeeze
Louise, which was apparently okay with Herb. He was rumored to have other
girlfriends, and he had the appalling habit of carrying lots of prophylactics on
him—at all times of the day and night—and when anyone said anything at all
about sex, Herb Fowler would reach into his pocket for a rubber and flip it at
the speaker (all rolled up in its wrapper, of course). He’d just flip a
prophylactic and say, “See these? They keep a fella free.”

Wally had already had several rubbers flipped at him, and he was tired of the

joke, and he was not in the best humor to have the joke played on him again
in his present situation—but he imagined that Herb Fowler was the right sort
of man to ask, that, despite the rubbers, Herb Fowler was always getting girls
in trouble. One way or another, Herb looked like trouble for every girl alive.

“Hey, Herb,” Wally said to him. It was a rainy, late-spring day; college was

out, and Wally was working alongside Herb in the storage cellar, which was
empty in the spring. They were varnishing ladders, and when they finished
the ladders, they would start painting the tracks for the conveyors that ran
nonstop when the packinghouse was in full operation. Every year, everything
was repainted.

from his lips that his eyes were always squinted half shut, and he kept his
long face tipped up and back so that he could inhale the trail of smoke
through his nose.

would you do about it. Knowing your view,” Wally smartly added, “about
keeping yourself free.” That stole Herb’s punch line and probably made Herb
cross; he had a rubber half out of his pocket, ready to flip at Wally while
delivering his usual remark on the subject, but Wally’s saying it for him

forced him to arrest the motion of his flipping hand. He never brought the
rubber out.

“Who’d you knock up?” Herb asked, instead.
Wally corrected him. “I didn’t say I’d knocked up anybody. I asked you

what you’d do—if.”

Herb Fowler disappointed Wally. All he knew about was the same

mysterious parking lot in Cape Kenneth—something about a blindfold, a
butcher, and five hundred dollars.

“Maybe Meany Hyde would know about it,” Herb added. “Why don’tcha

ask Meany what he’d do if he knocked anybody up?” Herb Fowler smiled at
Wally—he was not a nice character—but Wally wouldn’t satisfy him; Wally
just smiled back.

who beat him up and otherwise abused him steadily. His brothers had
nicknamed him Meany—probably just to confuse him. Meany was ever-
friendly; he had a friendly wife, Florence, who was one of the packinghouse
and apple mart women; there had been so many children that Wally couldn’t
remember all their names, or tell one from the other, and therefore he found it
hard to imagine that Meany Hyde even knew what an abortion was.

watch Meany? What’s he do, except listen.”

the cider press; he was generally in charge of the cider mill, and because of
his nice disposition, he was often in charge of overseeing all the cider house
activities—including the dealings with the migrant workers who lived in the
cider house during the harvest. Olive made a point of keeping Herb Fowler at
a considerable distance from those poor migrant workers; Herb’s disposition
was not so agreeable.

Wally watched Meany Hyde waxing for a while. The sharp but clean odor of

the fermented cider and the old cider apples was strongest on a wet day, but
Meany seemed to like it; Wally didn’t mind it, either.

“Say, Meany,” Wally said, after a while.
“I thought you forgot my name,” Meany said cheerfully.
“Meany, what do you know about abortion?” Wally asked.
“I know it’s a sin,” Meany Hyde said, “and I know Grace Lynch has had one

—and in her case, I sympathize with her—if you know what I mean.”

Grace Lynch was Vernon Lynch’s wife; Wally—and everyone else—knew

that Vernon beat her. They had no children; it was rumored that this was the
result of Vernon’s beating Grace so much that Grace’s organs of generation
(as Homer Wells knew them) were damaged. Grace was one of the pie women

during the harvest and when the apple mart was humming; Wally wondered if
she’d be working today. There was lots to do in the orchards on a good day in
late spring; but when it was raining, there was just painting and washing, or
fixing up the cider house to get it ready for the harvest.

It was just like Meany Hyde to be waxing the press boards too early.

Someone would probably tell him to wax them again, just before it was time
for the first press. But Meany didn’t like painting or washing up, and when it
rained, he could kill whole days fussing over his beloved cider press.

“Who do you know needs an abortion, Wally?” Meany Hyde asked.
“A friend of a friend,” Wally said, which would have prompted a rubber

from Herb Fowler’s pocket, but Meany was nice—he took no pleasure in
anyone else’s bad luck.

about it—just don’t speak to her when Vernon’s around.”

Wally didn’t have to be told that. He had often seen the bruises on the backs

of Grace Lynch’s arms where Vernon had grabbed her and shook her. Once he
had seized her by the arms and yanked her toward him, lowering his head in
order to butt her in the face. This had happened, Wally knew, because Senior
had paid for Grace’s dental work (she’d told Senior and Olive that she’d
fallen downstairs). Vernon had also beaten up a black man, one of the
migrants, in the orchard called Old Trees, several harvests ago. The men had
been telling jokes, and the black man had offered a joke of his own. Vernon
hadn’t liked a black man telling jokes that had anything to do with sex—he’d
told Wally, in fact, that black people should be prevented from having sex.

“Or pretty soon,” Vernon had said, “there’ll be too many of them.”
In the Old Trees orchard, Vernon had snapped the man off his ladder, and

when the man picked himself off the ground, Vernon held both his arms and
butted him in the face over and over again, until Everett Taft, who was one of
the foremen, and Ira Titcomb, the beekeeper, had to pull Vernon off. The
black man had taken over twenty stitches in his mouth, in his lips, and in his
tongue; everyone knew Grace Lynch hadn’t lost her teeth falling down any
stairs.

It was Vernon who should have had Meany’s name, or something worse.
“Wally?” Meany asked him, as he was leaving the cider house. “Don’t tell

Grace I told you to ask her.”

muddy lane that divided the orchard called Frying Pan, because it was in a
valley, and was the hottest to work in, from the orchard called Doris, after
someone’s wife. He drove to the building called Number Two (it was simply
the second building for keeping the larger vehicles; the sprayers were

sheltered in Number Two because the building was more isolated, and the
sprayers—and the chemicals that went inside them—stank). Vernon Lynch
was painting in there; he had a spray gun with a long, needlelike nozzle and
he was hosing down the Hardie five-hundred-gallon sprayer with a fresh coat
of apple red. Vernon wore a respirator to protect himself from the paint fumes
(it was the same mask the men wore when they sprayed the trees), and he
wore his foul-weather gear—the complete oilskin suit. Wally somehow knew
it was Vernon, although not a single feature of Vernon was visible. Vernon
had a way of attacking his work that made his actions unmistakably his, and
Wally noticed that Vernon was painting the Hardie as if he were wielding a
flamethrower. Wally drove on; he didn’t want to ask Vernon where his wife
was today. Wally shuddered as he imagined several of Vernon’s leering
responses.

cigarettes and talking. They didn’t have much to do; and when they saw the
boss’s son coming, they didn’t throw down their coffee cups, stamp out their
cigarettes and disperse in different directions. They just stepped a little away
from one another and smiled at Wally sheepishly.

she dragged on her cigarette, and called out to Wally. “Hi, honey!”

“Hi, Florence,” Wally said, smiling.
Big Dot Taft, who’d miraculously run a mile, getting stung all the while, the

night Senior had dumped Ira Titcomb’s bees, put out her cigarette and picked
up an empty crate; then she put the crate down and wondered where she’d left
her broom. “Hi, cutey,” Dot said to Wally cheerfully.

“What’s new?” Wally asked the women.
“Nothing new here,” said Irene Titcomb, Ira’s wife. She laughed and turned

her face away. She was always laughing—and turning away the side of her
face with the burn scar, as if she were meeting you for the first time and could
keep the scar a secret. The accident had happened years ago, and there
couldn’t have been anyone in Heart’s Haven or Heart’s Rock who hadn’t seen
Irene Titcomb’s scar and didn’t know the exact details of how she got it.

One night Ira Titcomb had sat out in his yard all night with an oil torch and

a shotgun; something had been getting into his hives—probably a bear or a
raccoon. Irene had known this was Ira’s plan, yet she was surprised when she
woke up, hearing him calling her. He was on the lawn and waving the lit torch
under her window; all she saw was the torchlight. He asked her to make him
some bacon and eggs, if she wouldn’t mind, because he was so bored waiting
for whatever it was he intended to shoot that he’d gotten hungry.

Irene was humming to herself, watching the bacon fry, when Ira came to the

kitchen window and tapped on the pane to find out if the food was ready.
Irene was unprepared for the vision of Ira in his beekeeper suit, moving out of
the darkness and into the faint light from the kitchen window with fire in his
hands. She had seen her husband in his beekeeper suit many times, but she
hadn’t imagined that he’d be wearing it while he waited to shoot a bear or a
coon. She’d never seen the way the suit glowed in firelight, or at night, either.

into one of the hives and loose a few bees. He had no intention of scaring his
wife, but poor Irene looked out the window and saw what she thought was a
flaming white apparition! No doubt this was what had been molesting the
hives! The ghost of a beekeeper of bygone days! It had probably killed poor
Ira and was now coming for her! The frying pan flew up in her hands,
splashing the hot bacon grease on her face. Irene was lucky she didn’t blind
herself. Oh, those at-home accidents! How they surprise you.

teased and flirted with Wally endlessly; they thought he was gorgeous and a
lot of fun, and these three had known him since he was a little boy.

face still turned away.

“Why don’t you take us to a movie, Wally?” Florence Hyde asked him.
“Oh, God, what I wouldn’t do for you, Wally,” Dot Taft said, “if you took

me to a movie!”

little.

the three of them. Dot Taft roared so loud that Florence Hyde inhaled her
cigarette the wrong way and began to cough, which made Dot roar some
more.

“Is Grace here today?” Wally asked casually, when the women calmed

down.

got?”

and pains.

was deliberate; he handled himself very smoothly around the mart women.

“I’ll bet she’ll say ‘No!’ ” Irene Titcomb said, giggling.
“No, everyone says ‘Yes!’ to Wally,” Florence Hyde teased.
Wally allowed the laughter to subside.
Then Dot Taft said, “Grace is cleaning the pie oven.”

away.

us jealous.”

laughter and coughing.

mart women chattering and smoking at a higher pitch than when he’d found
them.

day. The other women sympathized with her, but she was not one of them.
She stood apart, as if she were afraid everyone might suddenly turn on her
and beat her as badly as Vernon did, as if the beatings she’d already survived
had cost her the necessary humor for trading stories equally with Florence and
Irene and Dot.

thinness was unusual among the regular mart women. Even Herb Fowler’s
girlfriend (Squeeze Louise) was heftier than Grace, and Dot Taft’s kid sister,
Debra Pettigrew—who was fairly regular in pie season, and when the
assembly line to the packinghouse was running—even Debra had more flesh
on her than Grace had.

usual; there was a grim concentration to the narrow line of her mouth. Wally
couldn’t remember ever seeing Grace Lynch laugh—and some form of
yucking it up was essential to relieve the boredom of the life of the apple mart
women. Grace was simply the cowed dog among them. She didn’t look as if
she took any pleasure from eating pie—or from eating anything at all. She
didn’t smoke, and in 194_ everyone smoked—even Wally. She was noise-shy
and flinched around the machinery.

at the bruises on her arms, but she was half in one of the deep shelves of the
pie oven when Wally found her; she was wearing a long-sleeved shirt, but
both sleeves were rolled up above her elbows to spare the shirt some of the
oven-black. Wally startled her with her head in the oven, and half her body,
too, and Grace made a little cry and banged one of her elbows against the
door hinge as she withdrew in too much of a hurry.

Grace without making her bump into something. She said nothing; she rubbed
one elbow; she folded and unfolded her thin arms, hiding her very slight
breasts or, by keeping her arms in constant motion, concealing her bruises.

She wouldn’t look Wally in the eye; as poised as Wally was, he always felt a
terrific tension when he tried to talk with her; he felt she might suddenly run
away from him or throw herself at him—either with her claws out, or kissing
him with her tongue stabbing.

her body for a sexual interest; maybe that was part of the problem between
them.

that was all.

steel wool so tightly that the dirty suds streaked down one arm and wet the
waist of her shirt and the bony hip of her denim work jeans. A single tooth,
probably false, appeared out of her mouth and clenched a tiny piece of her
lower lip. “Uh, Grace,” Wally said. “I’ve got a problem.”

had ever told her. She looked quickly away and said, “I’m cleaning the oven.”
Wally thought he might have to grab her to keep her from crawling back in
the oven. He suddenly realized that all his secrets—that anyone’s secrets—
were entirely safe with Grace Lynch. There was absolutely nothing she dared
to say, and no one in her life to tell it to—if she ever got up the courage.

come up—or the strong ammonia fumes of the oven cleaner had overpowered
her. She looked at Wally again with her eyes as round as a rabbit’s.

saw him talking to Grace, Vernon would probably find that just cause for
giving Grace another beating. “Please just tell me what you know, Grace,”
Wally said.

she hissed; it was a loud whisper. Wally thought it was someone’s name—the
name of a saint? Or else a kind of nickname for an exceptionally evil
abortionist—St. Cloud’s! Grace Lynch, it was clear, had no luck. If she’d been
to an abortionist, wouldn’t it have to be the worst abortionist one could
imagine?

looking up at Wally anymore—she would never again look up at him. “The
place is called Saint Cloud’s, and the doctor’s good—he’s kinda gentle, he
makes it okay.” For her, this was virtually a sermon—at least a speech. “But
don’t make her go alone—okay, Wally?” Grace said, actually reaching out
and touching him—but recoiling the instant she made contact, as if Wally’s
skin were hotter than the pie oven when it was fired up.

“No, I won’t make her go alone, of course,” Wally promised her.
“You ask for the orphanage when you get off the train,” Grace said. She

climbed back in the oven before he could thank her.

was going, or he would probably have beaten her for it. Since she’d been
gone overnight, he’d beaten her for that, but perhaps it was a lesser beating by
his standards.

she’d not been housed with the expectant mothers; she’d been so jittery that
Dr. Larch’s sedation had not affected her very much and she’d been awake
through the night, listening to everything. It had been before Homer’s days as
an apprentice, so if Homer had seen her, he would never remember her, and
when—one day—Grace Lynch would see Homer Wells, she wouldn’t
recognize him.

and there’d been no complications—except in her dreams. There had never
been any serious complications following any abortion Dr. Larch had ever
performed, and no permanent damage from any of the operations—unless it
was something so interior, so very much in the mind, that Dr. Larch couldn’t
have been responsible for it.

and Larch had been, as Grace had told Wally, gentle—Grace Lynch hated to
think of St. Cloud’s. It was not so much for her own experience, or because of
her own trouble, but because of the atmosphere of the place in the long night
she’d stayed awake. The dense air hung like a great weight, the disturbed
river smelled like death, the cries of the babies were weirder than the cries of
loons—and there were owls, and someone peeing, and someone walking
around. There was a far-off machine (the typewriter), and a shout from
another building—just one long wail (possibly, that had been Melony).

After Wally had visited with her, Grace balked at finishing the pie oven job.

She felt sick to her stomach—it was like the cramps she’d had that time—and
she went out to the apple mart and asked the women there if they’d finish the
oven for her; she just didn’t feel well, she said. Nobody teased Grace. Big Dot
Taft asked her if she’d like a ride home, and Irene Titcomb and Florence Hyde
(who had nothing to do, anyway) said they’d tackle the oven “in two shakes,”
as they say in Maine. Grace Lynch went to find Olive Worthington; she told
Olive she wasn’t feeling well and was going home early.

Number Two when Olive cruised past him in the faded pickup. Olive’s look
was such that Vernon wondered for a moment if he’d been fired, if that look
was all the notice he was going to get. But the thought quickly passed, the
way thoughts tended to pass through Vernon Lynch. He looked at the muddy
tracks left by Olive’s pickup and said something typical.

“Suck my dick, you rich bitch,” Vernon Lynch said. Then he continued to

clean out the spray-gun nozzle.

little he knew about St. Cloud’s. He didn’t know, for example, that there was
an apostrophe. He’d not bothered to apply to Harvard; his grades weren’t
good enough to get him into Bowdoin; the University of Maine, where he was
halfheartedly majoring in botany, hadn’t taught him a thing about grammar.

“I knew it was an orphanage,” Candy said. “That’s all I knew.”
It was clear to them both that no good excuse could be invented for their

being gone overnight, so Wally arranged to borrow Senior’s Cadillac; they
would have to leave very early in the morning and return in the evening of the
same day. Wally told Senior it was the best time of year to explore the coast,
and maybe drive a little inland; the coast would have more tourists as the
summer progressed, and inland it would get too hot for a comfortable drive.

It’s just to have a little adventure with Candy—just a day off.”

Olive wondered if Wally would ever amount to anything.
Ray Kendall had his own work to worry about. He knew Candy would be

happy to take a drive with Wally. Wally was a good driver—if a trifle fast—
and the Cadillac, Ray knew better than anyone, was a safe car. Ray did all the
work on it.

them was awake through the night. Like most truly loving young couples,
they found themselves worrying about what effect this experience would have
on the other. Wally worried that an abortion would make Candy unhappy, or
even uncomfortable with sex. Candy wondered if Wally would feel the same
way about her after all this was over.

Larch sat at the typewriter in Nurse Angela’s office; through the window, he
saw Homer Wells walking around outside, with an oil lamp in the darkness.
What is the matter now? Larch wondered, and went to see what Homer was
doing.

“I couldn’t sleep,” Homer told Larch.
“What is it this time?” Dr. Larch asked Homer.
“Maybe it’s just an owl,” said Homer Wells. The oil lamp didn’t project very

far into the darkness, and the wind was strong, which was unusual for St.
Cloud’s. When the wind blew out the lamp, the doctor and his assistant saw
that they were backlit by the light shining from the window of Nurse Angela’s
office. It was the only light for miles around, and it made their shadows
gigantic. Larch’s shadow reached across the stripped, unplanted plot of
ground, up the barren hillside, all the way into the black woods. Homer
Wells’s shadow touched the dark sky. It was only then that both men noticed:
Homer had grown taller than Dr. Larch.

looked like a magician about to reveal something. Larch flapped his arms like
a big bat. “Look!” he said to Homer. “I’m a sorcerer!”

Homer Wells, the sorcerer’s apprentice, flapped his arms, too.
The wind was very strong and fresh. The usual density in the air above St.

Cloud’s had lifted; the stars shone bright and cold; the memory of cigar
smoke and sawdust was missing from this new air.

“Feel that wind,” said Homer Wells; maybe the wind was keeping him up.
“It’s a wind coming from the coast,” Wilbur Larch said; he sniffed, deeply,

for traces of salt. It was a rare sea breeze, Larch was sure.

Wherever it’s from, it’s nice, Homer Wells decided.
Both men stood sniffing the wind. Each man thought: What is going to

happen to me?

Homer Breaks a Promise

The stationmaster at St. Cloud’s was a lonely, unattractive man—a victim of
mail-order catalogues and of an especially crackpot mail-order religion. The
latter, whose publication took an almost comic book form, was delivered
monthly; the last month’s issue, for example, had a cover illustration of a
skeleton in soldier’s clothes flying on a winged zebra over a battlefield that
vaguely resembled the trenches of World War I. The other mail-order
catalogues were of a more standard variety, but the stationmaster was such a
victim of his superstitions that his dreams frequently confused the images of
his mail-order religious material with the household gadgets, nursing bras,
folding chairs, and giant zucchinis he saw advertised in the catalogues.

Thus it was not unusual for him to be awakened in a night terror by a vision

of coffins levitating from a picture-perfect garden—the prize-winning
vegetables taking flight with the corpses. There was one catalogue devoted
entirely to fishing equipment; the stationmaster’s cadavers were often seen in
waders or carrying rods and nets; and then there were the undergarment
catalogues, advertising bras and girdles. The flying dead in bras and girdles
especially frightened the stationmaster.

The most particularly crackpot aspect of the mail-order religion was its

insistence on the presence of the growing numbers of the restless, homeless,
unsaved dead; in areas of the world more populated than St. Cloud’s, the
stationmaster imagined that these luckless souls were crowding the sky. The
arrival of Dr. Larch’s “Clara” fitted ominously into the stationmaster’s pattern
of night terrors and contributed to his especially stricken appearance upon the
arrival of every new train—although Larch had assured the moron that there
would be no new bodies arriving for at least a year or two.

To the stationmaster, the notion of Judgment Day was as tangible as the

weather. He hated the first train of the morning the most. It was the milk train;
and in any weather, the heavy cans were covered with a cold sweat. The

empty cans, which were put on the train, produced a kind of death knell, a
hollow bonging noise, as they tapped the wooden station platform or were
handed up the iron stairs. The first train of the morning was the mail train,
too; although the stationmaster was eager for new catalogues, he never lost
his fear of the mail—of what might be coming his way: if not another
cadaver, sloshing in embalming fluid, then the monthly warning from the
mail-order religion that Judgment Day was at hand (always sooner than it was
last expected, and always with more terrifying verve). The stationmaster lived
to be shocked.

A hole in a tomato could cause him to escalate his predawn bouts of feverish

prayer; dead animals (of whatever cause) made him tremble—he believed the
creatures’ souls clogged the air he needed to breathe or were capable of
invading his body. (They were certainly capable of contributing to his
sleeplessness, for the stationmaster was as veteran an insomniac as Wilbur
Larch and Homer Wells and was without the benefit of ether, youth, or
education.)

bat was blown off-course and struck his house. He was convinced that a
flying animal had died violently against his wall and that its rabid soul was
circling around outside, seeking entry. Then the wind made a moaning sound
as it funneled through the spokes of the stationmaster’s bicycle. A sudden gust
knocked the bicycle off its kickstand; it clattered on the brick path, its little
thumb bell dinging feebly—as if one of the world’s restless souls had failed in
an attempt to steal it. The stationmaster sat up in bed and screamed.

He had been advised in the monthly mail-order religious publication that

screaming was of some, if not certain, protection against homeless souls.
Indeed, the stationmaster’s scream was not without effect; its shrillness
dislodged a pigeon from the eaves of the house, and (since no pigeon desires
to fly at night) the bird hopped and scrabbled its way noisily across the
stationmaster’s roof looking for a quieter corner. The stationmaster lay on his
back, staring straight up at his roof; he expected the wandering soul to
descend at any moment upon him. The pigeon’s coo was the cry of another
tortured sinner, the stationmaster was sure. He got up and stared out of his
bedroom window, his nightlight weakly illuminating the small plot he had
recently tilled for his vegetable garden. The freshly turned earth shocked him;
he mistook it for a ready grave. It gave him such a turn that he quickly
dressed himself and tramped outside.

of the dead cannot invade an active body. You mustn’t be caught sleeping, or
even standing still; that was the main thing. And so the stationmaster boldly

set out for a brisk walk through St. Cloud’s. He muttered threateningly at the
would-be ghosts he saw everywhere. “Go away,” he growled—at this
building, at that sound, at every unclear shadow. A dog barked in one house.
The stationmaster surprised a raccoon busy with someone’s garbage, but live
animals didn’t bother him; he hissed at the coon and appeared satisfied when
the coon hissed back. He chose to stay away from the abandoned buildings
where, he remembered, that fat nightmare of a girl from the orphanage had
caused so much damage. He knew that in those buildings the lost souls were
both numerous and fierce.

the stationmaster became fairly aggressive in the presence of children and
their imagined souls. Like most easily frightened people, the stationmaster
was something of a bully when he perceived that he had the upper hand.
“Damn kids,” he muttered, passing the girls’ division. He had trouble thinking
of the girls’ division without imagining doing terrible things with that great
big ruffian-girl—the destroyer, he called her. He’d had more than one night
terror regarding her; she was often the model of the many bras and girdles in
his dreams. He paused only briefly by the girls’ division, sniffing deeply—he
thought he might catch some scent of Melony, the building wrecker—but the
wind was too strong; the wind was everywhere. It is a Judgment Day wind! he
thought, and walked quickly on. He was not going to stand still long enough
for some terrible soul to enter him.

Nurse Angela’s office, but he could look over the building, up the hillside,
and see the light from the window illuminating the eroded, unplanted hill. He
couldn’t see where the light was coming from, and this disquieted him; it
seemed eerie how a light from nowhere was making the stripped hill glow all
the way into the black edge of the woods.

The stationmaster could have wept at his own timidity, but he cursed himself

instead; so much of his sleep was lost to fear, and the first train of the
morning was such an early train. For most of the year, the train arrived when
it was still dark. And those women who were on it, sometimes . . . the
stationmaster shuddered. Those women in the loose clothes, always asking
where the orphanage was—some of them back the same evening, their faces
like ash, the color of so many of the faces in the stationmaster’s night terrors.
Very nearly, he thought, the color of Clara’s face, though the stationmaster
didn’t know her name. His one look at Clara had been so brief that it was
unfair he should be doomed to see her so many times since; and each time, he
saw more of her—in his dreams.

the boys’ division at the lit hillside above St. Cloud’s, and that was when he
saw the towering shadows of Wilbur Larch and Homer Wells—stretching, in
the case of one, to the woods’ dark edge and, in the case of the other,
stretching into the sky. The two giant figures flapped their huge, hill-spanning
arms; whipped by the wind, the stationmaster caught the word “sorcerer!” It
was then he knew that he could walk, or even run, all night—but he would not
escape, not this time. The last thought that the stationmaster had was that the
time for him, and for all the world, had come.

The next morning, the sea breeze still stirred St. Cloud’s. Even Melony
noticed it; her usual grouchiness was suspended—she had trouble waking up,
although she’d passed a wakeful night. She’d had the impression that all night
an animal was prowling the grounds of the girls’ division, probably getting
into the trash. And she’d been able to observe the two women walking up the
hill from the train station in the predawn glow. The women were not speaking
to each other—they probably didn’t know each other; they had certainly
guessed each other’s circumstances. The women walked head down. They
were both overdressed for the spring; Melony watched the wind press their
baggy winter coats against the women’s bodies. They don’t look pregnant,
Melony observed; she reminded herself to be on hand, at her favorite window,
to watch the women heading down the hill for the evening train. With what
they were giving up, Melony thought, one might expect their returning steps
to be lighter; and, after all, they were heading downhill. But every time, the
women walked more heavily down the hill than they had walked up it—it
appeared they’d been given something to carry away with them. Their gait
was quite the contrary from what one might expect in the gait of women
who’d been, truly, scraped clean.

Scraped not so clean, maybe, Melony thought. Although Homer Wells had

told her nothing, what trouble could exist that Melony couldn’t see? Whatever
there was that glimmered of wrong, that shone of mistake—of loss, of hope
abandoned, of the grim choices that were possible—Melony had an eye
expertly trained to see this, and more.

She’d not yet set foot outdoors but she could tell something different was in

the wind. She could not see the body of the stationmaster; he had fallen in the
weeds by the delivery entrance to the boys’ division—which was little used;
there was a separate delivery entrance for the hospital.

From his window-on-the-world, from Nurse Angela’s office, Dr. Larch

could not have seen the weeds where the stationmaster lay stiffening, either.
And it was not the stationmaster’s departed soul that troubled Larch that
morning. He’d had other sleepless nights; sea breezes were rare, but he had

felt them. There’d been a fight in the girls’ division that had required some
stitching in one girl’s lip and in another girl’s eyebrow, but Wilbur Larch
wasn’t worried about those girls. Homer Wells had done a very neat job with
the lip; Larch had handled the eyebrow, which presented more of a problem
with permanent scarring.

their respective pregnancies, and—in Nurse Edna’s judgment—both seemed
robust and sane. And there was an almost cheerful woman from Damariscotta
—she’d just begun her contractions, which appeared perfectly normal; she’d
had one previous delivery, very routine, and so Larch anticipated no difficulty
with her. He was thinking he’d have Homer deliver the Damariscotta woman
because it looked straightforward and because the woman, Nurse Angela had
said, had taken a particular liking to Homer; she had talked up a storm to him
every second he’d been around her.

So what’s wrong? thought Wilbur Larch. Or if not wrong, different?
So what if the mail was late and the dining hall said there’d been no milk

delivery? Larch didn’t know—and wouldn’t have cared—that the train station
had been more than usually disorganized in the stationmaster’s absence; he
didn’t know that the stationmaster was missing. Wilbur Larch had noticed no
disturbance among the souls crowding the sky above St. Cloud’s. With the
work he felt was his calling, Dr. Larch could not afford too rigorous a
contemplation of the soul.

occasion to contemplate the soul. A study of the soul had not been a part of
his training. And since there were no windows in the room where Homer
conducted his studies of Clara, it was not the stationmaster—or his soul—that
suddenly presented itself to Homer Wells.

Dr. Larch had asked Homer to prepare a fetus for an autopsy.
A woman from Three Mile Falls had been stabbed, or she had stabbed

herself; this was not unusual in Three Mile Falls but the pregnancy of the
woman was nearly full-term—and the possibility of delivering a live baby
from the dead woman had been unusual, even for Dr. Larch. He had
attempted to rescue the child but the child—or, rather, the embryo, nearly nine
months—had not escaped one of the stab wounds. Like its mother, the child
(or the fetus, as Dr. Larch preferred) had bled to death. It would have been a
boy—that much was clear to Homer Wells, or even to the untrained eye;
whatever one called it, it was very nearly a fully developed baby. Dr. Larch
had asked Homer to help him determine (more exactly than “bled to death”)
the source of the fetus’s bleeding.

pair of heavy scissors was all he needed to open the fetus’s sternum. He cut
straight up the middle, noticing immediately the slashed pulmonary artery; to
his surprise, the wound was less than half an inch away from a wide-open
ductus—in the fetus, the ductus arteriosus is half the size of the aorta, but
Homer had never looked inside a fetus before; in the born, within ten days,
the ductus becomes nothing but a fibrous thread. This change is initiated not
by any mystery but by the first breath, which closes the ductus and opens the
lungs. In the fetus, the ductus is a shunt—the blood bypasses the lungs on its
way to the aorta.

fetus has little need for blood in its lungs; a fetus doesn’t breathe. Yet Homer
was shocked; the stab wound, at the base of the ductus, appeared as a second
eye alongside the little opening of the ductus itself. The facts were
straightforward enough: the ductus was wide open because this fetus had
never taken its first breath.

What was the life of the embryo but a history of development? Homer

attached a tiny, needle-nosed clamp to the severed pulmonary artery. He
turned to the section in Gray’s devoted to the embryo. It was another shock
for him to remember that Gray’s did not begin with the embryo; it ended with
it. The embryo was the last thing considered.

Homer Wells had seen the products of conception in many stages of

development: in rather whole form, on occasion, and in such partial form as to
be barely recognizable, too. Why the old black-and-white drawings should
have affected him so strongly, he could not say. In Gray’s there was the
profile view of the head of a human embryo, estimated at twenty-seven days
old. Not quick, as Dr. Larch would be quick to point out, and not recognizably
human, either: what would be the spine was cocked, like a wrist, and where
the knuckles of the fist (above the wrist) would be, there was the ill-formed
face of a fish (the kind that lives below light, is never caught, could give you
nightmares). The undersurface of the head of the embryo gaped like an eel—
the eyes were at the sides of the head, as if they could protect the creature
from an attack from any direction. In eight weeks, though still not quick, the
fetus has a nose and a mouth; it has an expression, thought Homer Wells. And
with this discovery—that a fetus, as early as eight weeks, has an expression
—Homer Wells felt in the presence of what others call a soul.

shallow, white enamel examining tray; he used two clamps to hold the chest
incision open, and one more clamp to lift and expose the lacerated artery. The
baby’s cheeks appeared deflated; someone’s invisible hands appeared to press
its small face at its sides; it lay on its back, resting on its elbows—its forearms

held stiffly perpendicular to its chest. The tiny fingers of its hands were
slightly open—as if the baby were preparing to catch a ball.

umbilical cord, which was also too long; he clipped it again, and tied it off
neatly. There was a little caked blood on the tiny penis, and Homer cleaned
this away. A spot of old blood on the bright white edge of the enamel tray
came off easily with just a cotton swab dabbed with alcohol. The color of the
dead baby, especially against the whiteness of the tray, was of something
sallow-going-gray. Homer turned to the sink and vomited rather deftly in it.
When he ran the faucet to clean the sink, the old pipes pounded and howled;
he thought it was the pipes, or his dizziness, that made the room—the whole
building—tremble. He wasn’t thinking about the wind from the coast—how
strong it was!

He wasn’t blaming Dr. Larch, either. Homer felt there was nothing as simple

as anyone’s fault involved; it was not Larch’s fault—Larch did what he
believed in. If Wilbur Larch was a saint to Nurse Angela and to Nurse Edna,
he was both a saint and a father to Homer Wells. Larch knew what he was
doing—and for whom. But that quick and not-quick stuff: it didn’t work for
Homer Wells. You can call it a fetus, or an embryo, or the products of
conception, thought Homer Wells, but whatever you call it, it’s alive. And
whatever you do to it, Homer thought—and whatever you call what you do—
you’re killing it. He looked at the severed pulmonary artery, which was so
perfectly displayed in the open chest of the baby from Three Mile Falls. Let
Larch call it whatever he wants, thought Homer Wells. It’s his choice—if it’s
a fetus, to him, that’s fine. It’s a baby to me, thought Homer Wells. If Larch
has a choice, I have a choice, too.

He picked up the spotless tray and carried it into the hall, like a proud waiter

carrying a special dish to a favorite guest. Curly Day, forever snot-nosed, was
cruising in the corridor between the dispensary and Nurse Angela’s office. He
was not allowed to be playing there, but Curly Day had a bored-every-minute
look about him; he had the attention span of a rabbit. At the moment, Curly
was dragging a cardboard carton through the corridor. It was the carton the
new enema bags had come in; Homer recognized the carton because he had
unpacked it.

“Whatcha got?” Curly Day asked Homer, who held the tray and the dead

baby from Three Mile Falls at shoulder level; Curly Day came up to Homer’s
waist. When Homer got close to the carton, he saw that it was not empty;
David Copperfield, Junior, was in the bottom of the carton—Curly Day was
giving him a ride.

“Get out of here, Curly,” Homer said.

“Gomer!” cried David Copperfield.
“It’s Homer, you idiot,” Curly Day said.
“Gomer!” David Copperfield cried.
“Get out of here, please,” Homer told them.
“Whatcha got?” Curly asked Homer. He reached upward, for the edge of the

tray, but Homer picked off his dirty little hand; he grabbed Curly at the wrist
and twisted Curly’s arm behind his back. Homer balanced the tray and its
content expertly; Curly Day tried to struggle.

carton, but he lost his balance and sat down.

right-angle mark—which caused Curly to bend over and rest his forehead on
the edge of the enema-bag carton. “Cut it out,” Curly said.

“You’re leaving, Curly—right?” Homer asked.
“Yeah, yeah,” Curly said, and Homer let him go. “Tough guy,” Curly said.
“Right,” said Homer Wells.
“Gomer!” David Copperfield managed to say.
Curly Day wiped his nose on his disheveled sleeve. He jerked the carton so

suddenly that David Copperfield rolled on his side. “Ack!” little Copperfield
cried.

whom he gave a look of peevish sorrow, of aimless complaint—nothing more.
His body bobbed from side to side as he made his way with the carton
containing David Copperfield. Homer noted that Curly’s shoes were on the
wrong feet, and one of them was untied, but he decided it would be unworthy
criticism to mention this to Curly, who was as buoyant as he was messy—and
wasn’t his buoyancy more important than his carelessness, especially since he
was an orphan?

“Good-bye, Curly,” Homer said to the boy’s slouched back; Curly’s

untucked shirt hung to his knees.

the dispensary door, Nurse Edna appeared and scolded him.

“You’re not supposed to be playing here, Curly,” she said.
“Yeah, yeah,” Curly said. “I’m going, I’m going.”
“Medna!” David Copperfield cried in a muffled voice from the bottom of

the enema-bag carton.

“It’s Edna, you little scum,” Curly said.
Then Homer was at the door of Nurse Angela’s office, which was open. He

could see Dr. Larch at the typewriter; the doctor wasn’t writing; there wasn’t
even any paper in the machine. Dr. Larch was just looking out the window. In

the doctor’s trancelike expression Homer recognized the peaceful distance
that ether provided in those moments when Homer had found the doctor “just
resting” in the dispensary. Perhaps the state of mind that ether occasionally
allowed Dr. Larch to enjoy was, increasingly, a state of mind that Larch could
summon by just looking out a window. Homer assumed that Dr. Larch used a
little ether because he was in some kind of pain; he suspected that almost
everyone in St. Cloud’s was in some kind of pain, and that Larch, as a doctor,
was especially qualified in remedying it. The smell of ether was so cloying
and nauseating to Homer Wells that it was no remedy he would have chosen.
It hadn’t yet occurred to him: what an addiction was. The state of a dream was
so present on Wilbur Larch’s face that Homer Wells paused in the doorway
before continuing his gruesome presentation; he almost turned around and
took the baby from Three Mile Falls away with him.

the accompanying sense of mission to pass without remarking upon it; and a
sense of mission usually requires a gesture more demonstrative than a passing
remark. In the doorway of Nurse Angela’s office, Homer hesitated; then he
stepped forward and clunked the metal tray down on top of the typewriter.
The dead baby from Three Mile Falls was level with Dr. Larch’s throat—it
was close enough to bite, as they say in Maine.

stared over the baby at Homer. “The source of the bleeding was the
pulmonary artery, which was completely severed—as you see,” Homer said,
as Larch looked down at the display upon the typewriter. He stared at the
baby as if it were something he’d written—come to life (and then to death) at
his bidding.

Outside the hospital, someone was screaming, but the wind whipped the

words to a muddle; the screamer’s message sounded confused.

“Goddamn!” said Wilbur Larch, staring at the severed artery.
“I have to tell you that I won’t perform an abortion, not ever,” Homer Wells

said. This followed, logically, from the severed artery; in Homer’s mind, it
followed, but Dr. Larch looked confused.

“You won’t?” Larch said. “You what?”
Outside, the screaming was louder but no more distinct. Homer Wells and

Dr. Larch just stared at each other—the baby from Three Mile Falls
occupying the space between them.

“I’m coming, I’m coming,” they heard Nurse Angela say.
“It’s that Curly Day,” Nurse Edna was explaining to Nurse Angela. “I just

had to kick him and the Copperfield kid out of here.”

“Not ever,” Homer Wells said.

“You disapprove?” Dr. Larch asked Homer.
“I don’t disapprove of you,” Homer Wells said. “I disapprove of it—it’s not

for me.”

“Well, I’ve never forced you,” Dr. Larch said. “And I never will. It’s all your

choice.”

“Right,” said Homer Wells.
A door opened, but what Curly Day was caterwauling about was no clearer.

Dr. Larch and Homer Wells heard the test tubes in the rack by the dispensary
door tinkle; over these chimes, and for the first time holding its own with the
wind, the word “Dead!” came through to them.

“Dead! Dead! Dead!” Curly Day was screaming, his announcement

punctuated by the unintelligible, monosyllabic utterances of young
Copperfield.

“Who’s dead, dear?” Nurse Angela asked Curly sweetly.
Curly Day had discovered that the stationmaster was dead; Curly didn’t

know it was the stationmaster—Curly hadn’t taken a long enough look.

“A guy is dead!” Curly said to Nurse Angela and Nurse Edna.
Wilbur Larch, who heard this distinctly, got up from the desk and walked

past Homer Wells, into the hall.

permission to not be there, when you do what you have to do. I want to be of
use in any other way, and I’m not disapproving of you,” Homer said. “If it’s
okay, I just don’t want to watch it.”

“I’ll have to think about that, Homer,” Dr. Larch said. “Let’s see who’s dead,

shall we?” As Homer followed Larch down the hall, he noted that the door to
the delivery room was closed, and that the door light was on—which meant
that Nurse Edna or Nurse Angela had prepared the two women who were
waiting for their abortions. The woman from Damariscotta, whose
contractions were still slow and regular, probably wouldn’t be needing the
delivery room until long after Larch was through the two abortions. Homer
agreed with Dr. Larch that it was cruel to make the women waiting for the
abortions wait any longer than was necessary, especially after they’d been
prepared, and so Homer opened the delivery room door and poked his head
inside without really looking at either woman. He announced, “The doctor
will be right with you—please don’t worry.”

door, Curly Day began his “Dead!” chant all over again.

Copperfield (in the carton) off the loading platform at the boys’ division
delivery entrance. It had been a struggle to get the carton and Copperfield up
the ramp; but once elevated above the little-used driveway and the tall weeds,
Curly imagined that Copperfield might be taught how to almost fly. Surely it
wasn’t such a high drop; in the carton, especially, it wouldn’t be much of a
fall. And the weedy hill that sloped away from the loading platform would
probably allow the enema-bag carton to slide. Curly did foresee the possible
damage to the carton—the destruction of which would leave him in the
company of David Copperfield, all alone, and the prospect of Copperfield
without a carton or another plaything was powerfully boring. But Curly was
already tired of the possible uses of Copperfield with (or in) the carton; he had
exhausted the safe things there were to do, and Copperfield was not
complaining. Copperfield didn’t know he was on the brink of the loading
platform; he couldn’t see over the sides of the carton. When Curly pushed the
carton and Copperfield over the edge, he was careful to keep the carton in an
upright position, thus preventing Copperfield from landing on his head. The
carton landed on one corner, which collapsed; and young Copperfield was
propelled down the bank of tall weeds. Like an unsteady chick staggering out
of its shell, he came briefly to his feet before he fell and rolled, again and
again. From the platform, Curly Day watched the weeds waving at him; if the
weeds indicated Copperfield’s whereabouts, they were too tall for Curly to
actually see Copperfield.

and he couldn’t see the carton—which he’d grown rather fond of. When he
stopped rolling, he tried to stand, but dizziness, in combination with the
uneven ground, unbalanced him, and he sat down. What he sat on was
something hard and round, like a stone, but when he looked at what it was, he
saw it was the stationmaster’s head—face up, eyes open, a strangely
accepting terror in the frozen expression.

An older child, or even an adult, might have been upset at sitting on the dead

stationmaster’s face, but young David Copperfield viewed it much as he
viewed the rest of the world: with more curiosity than surprise. However,
when he touched the face and felt its coldness, the correctness of the child’s
sensibilities was apparent: the coldness was surely wrong. Young Copperfield
leaped away, rolled, came to his feet, ran, fell, rolled again. Finally on his
feet, he began to yelp like a dog. Curly Day began to track him through the
tall weeds.

“Hang on, hang on, don’t get excited!” Curly called to the boy, but

Copperfield ran and fell in circles, barking strangely. “Stay in one place so I
can find you!” Curly yelled. He stepped on something that rolled under his

shoe; it felt like a freshly fallen branch that had not yet settled into the
ground; it was the stationmaster’s arm. In an attempt to catch his balance,
Curly put his hand on the stationmaster’s chest. The wide-eyed, unflinching
face, which the tall weeds sheltered from the wind, stared past Curly,
undisturbed. And then, in the plot of weeds, there were two barking dogs,
who moved as if trapped in a maze. It was a testimony to something basically
brave and responsible in Curly Day that the boy did not bolt from the weeds
until he found David Copperfield.

Melony, at her window, watched the inexplicable thrashing through the

weeds; at any time, she could have yelled out to Curly Day and told him the
whereabouts of David Copperfield—she could see by the movement of the
weeds which yelping animal was where. But she let them fend for themselves.
Only when Curly Day was dragging young Copperfield up the driveway,
around the boys’ division toward the hospital entrance, did Melony feel
inclined to comment.

But the wind was too strong. Curly couldn’t hear her; she couldn’t hear what
Curly was yelling. She spoke just one more word out the window, to no one in
particular; she felt that the wind allowed her to say exactly what she felt, from
the heart, as loudly as she chose, although she did not even bother to speak
loudly. “Boring,” she said.

But things became more interesting to Melony when Wilbur Larch and

Homer Wells—and Nurse Edna and Nurse Angela—appeared in the driveway
by the boys’ division delivery entrance. They were clearly searching the plot
of tall weeds.

noise of the wind or the intentness with which the searchers plunged through
the weeds caused her question to be ignored. She decided to go see for
herself.

time she felt grateful that something seemed to be happening—that anything
at all was happening was vaguely all right with Melony.

This was not a feeling shared by either Candy Kendall or Wally

Worthington, who for the last three hours had maintained an awkward silence
—their sense of anticipation was too keen to conceal with conversation. It had
still been dark when they’d left the coast at Heart’s Haven and ventured
inland—away from the wind, although the wind was still surprisingly strong.
Wally had studied the map so excessively the night before that the white
Cadillac moved as purposefully away from the sea as an oyster or its pearl
washing resolutely ashore. It was really too windy, even inland, for the top to

be down, but Wally preferred the Cadillac when it was a proper convertible,
and also—with the top down, with the rush of the wind so noisily in the car—
the absence of conversation between him and Candy was less obtrusive.
Candy preferred it, too; her honey-blond hair was all around her face—such
wild swirls of hair surrounded her face at times that she knew Wally couldn’t
see her expression. Wally knew what her expression was, anyway; he knew
her very well.

every so often, but when she returned the book to her lap, the same page was
dog-eared. The book was Little Dorrit by Charles Dickens. It was required
summer reading for all the girls in Candy’s would-be graduating class; Candy
had begun it four or five times, but she had no idea what the book was about,
or whether she even liked it.

Wally, who was no reader, didn’t bother to notice the name of the book; he

just watched the same dog-eared page and thought about Candy. He was also
thinking about St. Cloud’s. He was already (in his mind) through the abortion;
Candy was recovering nicely; the doctor was telling jokes; all the nurses were
laughing. There were enough nurses to win a war, in Wally’s imagination. All
of them were young and pretty. And the orphans were amusing little tykes,
with the appropriate gaps in their toothy smiles.

In the trunk of Senior Worthington’s gliding Cadillac, Wally had three apple

crates crammed full of goodies for the orphans. If it had been the proper
season, he would have brought them apples and cider; in the spring there
weren’t any fresh apples, and there wasn’t any cider, but Wally had provided
the next best thing—in his opinion. He had loaded the Cadillac with jars and
jars of the Worthingtons’ best apple-cider jelly and crab-apple jelly, and with
half-gallon jugs of Ira Titcomb’s best apple-blossom honey. He imagined
arriving for this abortion like Santa Claus (an unfortunate image, if one
considered Wilbur Larch’s memory of the abortion place “Off Harrison”).

Wally imagined that Candy was sitting up after her abortion, with that relief

on her face of someone who had just had a nasty splinter removed; oddly,
Wally populated the abortion room itself with the aura of celebration one
associates with the birth of a welcome child. The air of Wally’s wishful
thinking was rich with congratulation—and through the lighthearted scene
traipsed the cute waifs of St. Cloud’s, each with his or her own jar of jelly.
Little honey-carriers, as happy as bear cubs!

Candy closed her book and returned it to her lap again, and Wally felt he had

to say something.

“How’s the book?” he said.
“I don’t know,” Candy said, and laughed.

with her. She pinched his thigh in return—a pinch of the exact same passion
and pressure as the one he’d given her. Oh, how relieved he was that they
were so alike!

drove like lost royalty—the oyster-white Cadillac with its dazzling passengers
was a head-turner. That scarlet upholstery, so curiously mottled by Senior’s
accident with the chemicals, was unique. Everyone who saw them pass would
not forget them.

thigh; he simply let his hand rest in her lap, near Little Dorrit. Candy put her
hand on top of his, while Melony—stalking through the girls’ division lobby
with more than usual purpose—caught Mrs. Grogan’s generous and watchful
eye.

“What’s going on, dear?” Mrs. Grogan asked Melony.
“I don’t know,” Melony said, shrugging. “You can bet it ain’t a new boy in

town, or nothing,” which was a mild remark for Melony; Mrs. Grogan
thought, How the girl has mellowed. She had mellowed—a little. A very little.

Something about the big young woman’s determination made Mrs. Grogan

follow her outside. “My, what a wind!” Mrs. Grogan exclaimed. Where have
you been? Melony thought, but she didn’t utter a word; the degree that she
had mellowed could be confused with not caring much anymore.

“It’s the stationmaster,” said Homer Wells, who was the first to find the

body.

“That moron!” Wilbur Larch muttered.
“Well, he’s dead, anyway,” Homer informed Dr. Larch, who was still

struggling through the weeds, en route to the body. Dr. Larch refrained from
saying that by dying in this manner the stationmaster was intending a further
inconvenience to the orphanage. If Wilbur Larch was mellowing, he was also
mellowing very little.

St. Cloud’s was not a place that mellowed you.
Homer Wells looked over the weeds that concealed the dead stationmaster

and saw Melony striding toward him.

powerful wind swept his hair away from his face; he leaned his chest into the
wind, as if he stood on the deck of a ship heading into the wind, slicing
through the waves of an ocean he’d not yet seen.

Wilbur Larch was thinking about the weak heart he had invented for Homer
Wells. Larch was wondering how he should tell Homer about having a weak

heart without frightening the young man or reminding him of the vision
frozen upon the face of the stationmaster. What in Hell had that fool imagined
he’d seen? Dr. Larch wondered, as he helped the others lug the
stationmaster’s stiffened body to the hospital entrance.

Curly Day, who enjoyed being kept busy, had already been sent to the

railroad station; young Copperfield had gone with him, which slowed Curly
down considerably—yet Curly was grateful for the company. Curly was
slightly confused about the message he was sent to deliver, and Copperfield at
least presented Curly with a model listener. Curly practiced the message he
thought he was supposed to deliver by saying it aloud to David Copperfield;
the message had no visible effect on Copperfield, but Curly found the
repetition of the message soothing and the practice helped him to understand
it, or so he thought.

the hill—Copperfield’s head either nodding agreement or just bouncing
loosely between the boy’s jerking shoulders. The downhill pace was hard for
Copperfield, whose balance wasn’t the best, and his left hand (grasped in
Curly Day’s hand) was pulled high above his left ear.

added, which didn’t sound quite right to him, but after he repeated it a few
times it sounded more reasonable. What Larch had said was that the
stationmaster appeared to have had a heart attack several hours ago, but
Curly’s version felt more or less correct to Curly—the more he said it.

said Curly Day, and David Copperfield bobbed in agreement. This didn’t
sound right to Curly, either, no matter how many times he repeated it, but he
was sure he’d been told to say something like that. The word was “autopsy,”
not “automobile”; Curly had part of the word right. Perhaps, he thought, there
was some special car coming to carry the dead. It made a little sense, and a
little sense was sense enough for Curly Day—and more sense than Curly saw
in most things.

“Dead!” David Copperfield cried happily as they approached the train

station. Two of the usual oafs were lounging on the bench that faced away
from the tracks; they were the sort of louts who hung around the station all
day, as if the station were a house of beautiful women and the women were
known to grant favors to all the town’s untidy and unemployed. They paid no
attention to Curly Day and David Copperfield. (“Dead!” David Copperfield
called out to them, with no effect.)

particularly unlikable officiousness upon the officiousness of the

stationmaster, so that he had a completely inappropriate old-fart, complaining,
curmudgeonly aspect to his youthfulness—this in combination with the mean-
spiritedness of a dogcatcher who enjoys his work. He was a stupid young
man, who shared with the stationmaster an aspect of the bully: he would
holler at children to keep their feet off the benches, but he would simper
before anyone better dressed than himself and he tolerated any rudeness from
anyone who had any advantage over him. He was without exception cold and
superior to the women who got off the train and asked for directions to the
orphanage, and he had not once taken the arm of even one of those women
and offered his assistance when they mounted the stairs to the return train;
and that first step was a high one—many of the women who’d been scraped
clean had obvious trouble with that first step.

and disagreeable. He had given fifteen cents to one of the louts to go to the
stationmaster’s house and find him, but the clod had returned with no more
information than that the stationmaster’s bicycle had fallen over and been left
where it had fallen. Ominous, thought the assistant, but frustrating. He was
half irritated at having to do the stationmaster’s chores, which he’d done
poorly, and half thrilled at the prospect of being in charge. When he saw those
two dirty urchins from the orphanage crossing the main road in front of the
station and coming his way, the stationmaster’s assistant felt his authority
swell. Curly Day, wiping his nose on one arm, dragging David Copperfield
with the other, seemed on the verge of speaking, but the stationmaster’s
assistant spoke first.

“Beat it,” he said. “You don’t belong here.”
Curly halted; young Copperfield collided with him and staggered from the

suddenness of the collision. Curly fully believed he “belonged” nowhere, but
he gathered his confidence and delivered, quite loudly, his rehearsed message:
“The stationmaster is dead! Doctor Larch says he had a heart attack for
several hours! Tell the relatives and friends that there’s soon gonna be an
automobile!”

and conflicting feelings: that the stationmaster was dead might mean that he,
the assistant, would be the next stationmaster; that it was possible for
someone to suffer a heart attack lasting several hours was unimaginably
painful; and what was this promise—or threat—about an automobile?

What relatives, what friends? the two louts wondered.
“What’s that about an automobile?” the assistant asked Curly Day. Curly

suspected that he’d made a mistake but decided to bluff it out. It was not
advisable to display weakness or indecision before a bully, and Curly’s crafty

instincts for survival led him to choose confidence over the truth.

looked mildly impressed; they had not thought the stationmaster was
important enough to warrant a car to carry him away.

Falls—he had seen it once: a long, black car that moved slowly enough to
have been pulled by mules.

at all. “I mean an automobile.”

attack, reputed to last for several hours, were slowly beginning in all of them.
They were all just waiting for the next event of the day, when Senior
Worthington’s oyster-white Cadillac crept into view.

Candy had drawn more than their share of stares, but they were still
unprepared for the stunned gaping of the stationmaster’s assistant and the
extremes of gawking they provoked from the two louts who sat on the bench
in front of the station house as if they’d been nailed there.

enthusiasm. Candy could not help herself; she reached for his leg and gripped
him at midthigh—Little Dorrit plunged from her lap, grazing her locked-
together ankles on its way to the Cadillac’s floor. The faces of Curly Day and
David Copperfield were what struck Candy with the most force. In spite of
his grime and dishevelment, Curly Day’s face was shining—his smile was a
lucky beam of sunlight; it pierced the garbage and revealed the hidden glitter.
It was the hugeness of the expectation in Curly’s dirty face that took Candy’s
breath away; her eyes swam, her vision blurred—but not before the wide-
openness of David Copperfield’s mouth astonished her. From the teardrop
shape of his fat lower lip there hung a clear, healthy string of drool, suspended
nearly to his tight little fists, which he clenched against his stomach as if the
blinding white Cadillac had knocked the wind out of him, as solidly as a
punch.

Wally wasn’t sure, but he thought that the stationmaster’s assistant appeared

to be in charge of this strange assemblage of people. “Excuse me,” Wally said
to the assistant, whose mouth didn’t move, whose eyes didn’t blink. “Could
you tell me the way to the orphanage?”

“You sure got here in a hurry,” said the assistant lifelessly. A white hearse!

he was thinking. Not to mention the beauty of the body-snatchers; the
assistant found he was unable to look at the girl; his mind’s eye would never
forget its actual brief glimpse of her.

should be talking to someone else. A passing look at the oafs upon the bench
was enough to tell Wally that he should not ask them anything. And the littlest
child, with the crystal string of slobber now winking like an icicle in the
sunlight and reaching nearly to the grass-stained dimples on the child’s knees,
appeared to be too young for speech. “Hello,” Wally ventured pleasantly.

“Dead!” said David Copperfield, the drool dancing like tinsel on a

Christmas tree.

were easy to find—they were riveted on Candy. “Hello,” Candy said to him,
and Curly Day swallowed visibly—and with apparent pain. The wet end of
his nose looked raw, but he rubbed it vigorously anyway.

unlike the louts and the assistant, knew that this Cadillac and these angelic
specimens of the living had not been sent to retrieve the unwanted body of the
dead stationmaster. They want the orphanage, thought Curly Day. They’ve
come here to adopt someone! his pounding heart told him. Oh, God, thought
Curly Day—let it be me!

perfect monogram on the Cadillac’s door: Senior Worthington’s gold
monogram on the face of a gleaming Red Delicious apple—with a leaf of
spring-green brightness, the artless shape of a tear. Curly batted young
Copperfield’s hand away.

I got to take charge of things, Curly was thinking, if I want them to pick me.
“I’ll show you the orphanage,” said Curly Day. “Give us a ride.”
Candy smiled and opened the rear door for them. She was a little surprised

when Curly picked up young Copperfield and shoved him in the car—not on
the seat but on the floor. Copperfield seemed content on the floor; in fact,
when he touched the strangely mottled scarlet upholstery of the seat, he pulled
back his hand with alarm—he’d never touched leather before—and he
jumped as if he feared the seat might be alive. It had been a startling day for
young Copperfield: most of the morning confined in an enema-bag carton; his
first attempt at flight; his long fall through the weeds; and then sitting on that
dead man’s face. What next? young Copperfield wondered. When the
Cadillac began to move, he screamed. He’d never been inside a car before.

had never felt leather before either, but he tried to sit on the luxurious seat as
if he were born to ride forever in this fashion. He didn’t realize that the
bleached-out stains that striped the scarlet were the result of an accident with
chemicals—it would often be Curly Day’s misfortune to mistake an accident

for something artistically intended.

over the front seat and extended her arms to young Copperfield, whose
howling abruptly ceased. He recognized the way her hair fell forward to either
side of her face—this together with her outstretched arms and a certain
comfort in her smile were familiar to Copperfield from Nurse Angela and
Nurse Edna. Men, Copperfield thought, picked you up in one arm and carried
you over a hip; by “men” he meant Homer Wells and Dr. Larch. Curly Day
sometimes lugged Copperfield around in this fashion, but Curly wasn’t quite
strong enough and often dropped him.

“Come here, come here, don’t be afraid,” Candy said to Copperfield,

swinging him over the seat and putting him in her lap. Copperfield smiled and
touched Candy’s hair; he had never felt blond hair before, he wasn’t quite
sure if it was real. He had never smelled anyone who smelled this good either;
he drove his face into the side of her neck and took a great big sniff of her.
She actually hugged him, even kissed him on the blue dent of his temple. She
looked at Wally and almost cried.

could say that would make them want him. Why would anyone want me? he
began to wonder, but he fought off the thought. He sought Wally’s eyes in the
Cadillac’s rearview mirror; it was too painful for him to see the way Candy
held David Copperfield.

“You’re one of the orphans?” Wally asked—he hoped, tactfully.
“You bet!” Curly Day said, too loudly; he sounded too enthusiastic about it,

he thought. “I’m not just one of the orphans,” he blurted out suddenly, “I’m
the best one!” This made Candy laugh; she turned around in the front seat and
smiled at him, and Curly felt he was losing his grip on the leather upholstery.
He knew he should say something else, but his nose was running so violently
he was sure that whatever he said would be grotesque; before he could drag
his sleeve across his face, there was her hand with her handkerchief extended
to him. And she wasn’t just handing the handkerchief to him, he realized; she
was actually pressing the handkerchief to his nose and holding it correctly in
place.

Edna, he thought. He shut his eyes and blew his nose—at first, cautiously.

nose so emphatically that his head was instantly clear. The delicious scent of
her perfume made him giddy; he shut his eyes and wet his pants. Then he lost
control and flung himself back in the huge scarlet seat. He saw that he’d
blown his nose all over her hand—and she didn’t even look angry; she looked

concerned, and that made him pee even harder. He couldn’t stop himself. She
looked completely surprised.

“Left or right?” Wally asked heartily, pausing at the driveway to the boys’

division delivery entrance.

said to her, “I’m sorry! I don’t even wet my bed. I never have! I ain’t a bed-
wetter. I just got a cold! And I got excited! I’m just having a bad day. I’m
really good!” he cried. “I’m the best one!”

“It’s all right, it’s all right, get back in,” she said to him, but Curly was

already sprinting through the weeds and around the far corner of the building.

Candy held David Copperfield in her lap and felt himself breaking.

“Please,” he whispered to her, “you don’t have to do this. You can have the

baby. I want the baby—I want your baby. It would be fine. We can just turn
around,” he pleaded with her.

baby.” She put her face down on David Copperfield’s damp neck; the boy
smelled both sweet and mildewed.

The car stood still. “Are you sure?” Wally whispered to her. “You don’t have

to.” She loved him for saying just the right thing at the right time, but Candy
Kendall was more practical than Wally Worthington, and she had her father’s
stubbornness when her mind was made up; she was no waffler.

“The boy said you go left,” Candy said to Wally. “Go left.”
Mrs. Grogan, across the road in the girls’ division entrance, observed the

Cadillac’s hesitation. She had not seen Curly Day flee from the car and she
did not recognize the small child in the pretty girl’s lap. Mrs. Grogan assumed
that the child belonged to the pretty girl—she wondered if she’d ever seen a
girl that pretty. And her young man was certainly handsome—almost too
handsome for a husband, as they say in Maine.

too bad, she mused, because they certainly seemed well off. A Cadillac meant
nothing to Mrs. Grogan; it was the people themselves who appeared
expensive to her. She was puzzled by how charmed she felt to be looking at
these lovely people. Her few glimpses of the very rich had not charmed Mrs.
Grogan in the past; those glimpses had only made her feel bitter—on behalf
of the unadopted girls. She was all for her girls, Mrs. Grogan was; there was
nothing personal in her bitterness—and very little that was personal in her
whole life, really.

The car stood still, giving Mrs. Grogan a long view. Oh, the poor dears, she

thought. They are not married, they have had this child together, either he or

she is being disinherited—they have both, clearly, been disgraced—and now
they have come to give up their child. But they are hesitating! She wanted to
rush out and tell them: keep the child! Drive away! She felt paralyzed by the
drama she was imagining. Don’t do it! she whispered, mustering the strength
for an enormous telepathic signal.

It was the signal Wally felt when he told Candy that she didn’t have to. But

then the car started up again—it was not turning around, it was heading
straight for the hospital entrance of the boys’ division—and Mrs. Grogan’s
heart sank. Boy or girl? she wondered, numbly.

What the fuck is going on? wondered Melony, at her bitter window.
Because of the harsh overhead light in the dormitory, Melony could see her

own face reflected in the window; she watched the white Cadillac halt on her
upper lip. Curly Day escaped across her cheek, and the pretty blond girl’s
arms enclosed David Copperfield at Melony’s throat.

was troubled by the heaviness of her face, or how close together her eyes
were, or how her hair rebelled; it was her own expression that upset her—the
vacantness, the absence of energy (formerly, she imagined, she had at least
had energy). She couldn’t remember when she’d last looked at herself in a
mirror.

What troubled her, now, was that she’d just seen this familiar vacantness on

the face of Homer Wells when he’d lifted the stationmaster’s body—it wasn’t
the absence of strain, it was that look of zero surprise. Melony was afraid of
Homer. How things had changed! she thought. She’d wanted to remind him of
his promise. You won’t leave, will you? she’d almost asked. You’ll take me, if
you run away, she’d wanted to say, but her familiarity with his new
expression (because it was her nearly constant expression, she was sure) had
paralyzed her.

Now who are these pretty people? she wondered. Some car, she thought.

She’d not seen their faces, but even the backs of their heads had discomforted
her. The man’s blond hair had contrasted so perfectly with the smooth, tanned
back of his neck that it had given her a shiver. And how could the back of the
girl’s head be so perfect—the bounce and swing of her hair so accurate? Was
there some trick to aligning the length of the hair so exactly with the girl’s
straight but small shoulders? And it was positively graceful how she’d picked
up young Copperfield and held him in her lap—that little runt, thought
Melony. She must have said the word “runt” half aloud, because her breath
fogged the window at that instant; she lost sight of her own mouth and nose.
When the window cleared, she saw the car move on, toward the hospital
entrance. People like that are too perfect to need an abortion, Melony

imagined. They’re too perfect to fuck, she thought bitterly. They’re too clean
to do it. The pretty girl wonders why she can’t get pregnant. She doesn’t
know you have to fuck first. They’re considering adopting someone, but they
won’t find anyone here. There’s no one who’s good enough for them, thought
Melony—hating them. She spat straight into her own dull reflection and
watched her spit run down the pane. She hadn’t the energy to move. There
was a time, she thought, when I would have at least gone outdoors and poked
around the Cadillac. Maybe they would leave something in the car—
something good enough to steal. But now, not even the thought of something
to steal could move Melony from her window.

Dr. Larch had performed the first abortion with Nurse Edna’s assistance;
Larch had asked Homer to check on the contractions of the expectant mother
from Damariscotta. Nurse Angela was assisting Larch with the second
abortion, but Dr. Larch had insisted on Homer’s presence, too. He had
supervised Homer’s ether application; Dr. Larch had such a light touch with
ether that the first abortion patient had been speaking to Nurse Edna
throughout the operation and yet the woman hadn’t felt a thing. She talked
and talked: a kind of airy list of non sequiturs to which Nurse Edna responded
with enthusiasm.

Homer had put the second woman out, and he was clearly cross with himself

for sedating the woman more heavily than he’d meant to. “Better safe than
sorry,” Nurse Angela said encouragingly—her hands on the woman’s pale
temples, which she instinctively smoothed with her soft hands. Larch had
asked Homer to insert the vaginal speculum, and Homer now stared darkly at
the woman’s shiny cervix, at the puckered opening of the uterus. Bathed in a
clear mucus, it had an aura of morning mist, of dew, of the pink clouds of a
sunrise gathered around it. If Wally Worthington had peered through the
speculum, he would have imagined that he was viewing an apple in some
pale, ethereal phase of its development. But what is that little opening? he
might have wondered.

“How’s it look?” Larch asked.
“It looks fine,” said Homer Wells. To his surprise, Larch handed him the

cervical stabilizer—a simple instrument. It was for grabbing the upper lip of
the cervix and stabilizing the cervix, which was then sounded for depth and
dilated.

“Didn’t you get what I told you?” Homer asked Dr. Larch.
“Do you disapprove of touching the cervix, Homer?” Larch asked.
Homer reached for the lip of the woman’s cervix and seized it, correctly. I

won’t touch a single dilator, he thought. He won’t make me.

and dilated the cervix himself. When he asked for the curette, Homer handed
it to him.

Homer asked quietly. “I said that, if it was all the same to you, I’d just as soon
not watch. You remember?”

scrape of his curette; his breathing was shallow but regular.

watching, of lending some amateur assistance, of understanding the process,
of learning how to perform it—whether you ever choose to perform it or not.

that they simply can’t have an abortion, that they simply must go through with
having another—and yet another—orphan: do I interfere? Do I?

there are largely happy histories for the babies born here? Do you think the
futures of these orphans are rosy? Do you?

“You don’t,” Larch said. “But do I resist? I do not. I do not even

recommend. I give them what they want: an orphan or an abortion,” Larch
said.

“Well, I’m an orphan,” said Homer Wells.
“Do I insist that we have the same ideas? I do not,” Dr. Larch said.
“You wish it,” said Homer Wells.
“The women who come to me are not helped by wishes,” said Wilbur Larch.

He put down the medium-sized curette and held out his hand for a smaller
one, which Homer Wells had ready for him and handed to him automatically.

“I want to be of use,” Homer began, but Dr. Larch wouldn’t listen.
“Then you are not permitted to hide,” Larch said. “You are not permitted to

look away. It was you who told me, correctly, that if you were going to be of
use, if you were going to participate at all, you had to know everything.
Nothing could be kept from you. I learned that from you! Well, you’re right,”
Larch said. “You were right,” he added.

“It’s alive,” said Homer Wells. “That’s the only thing.”
“You are involved in a process,” said Dr. Larch. “Birth, on occasion, and

interrupting it—on other occasions. Your disapproval is noted. It is legitimate.
You are welcome to disapprove. But you are not welcome to be ignorant, to
look the other way, to be unable to perform—should you change your mind.”

“I won’t change my mind,” said Homer Wells.
“All right, then,” said Dr. Larch, “should you, against your will, but for the

life of the mother, for example . . . should you have to perform.”

“I’m not a doctor,” said Homer Wells.
“You are not a complete physician,” said Dr. Larch. “And you could study

with me for another ten years, and you still wouldn’t be complete. But
regarding all the known complications arising in the area of the female organs
of generation, regarding those organs—you can be a complete surgeon.
Period. You are already more competent than the most competent midwife,
damn it,” said Wilbur Larch.

the first of several sterile vulval pads.

“but you will watch, you will know how to do what I do. Otherwise, what
good am I?” he asked. “Aren’t we put on this earth to work? At least to learn,
at least to watch? What do you think it means, to be of use?” he asked. “Do
you think you should be left alone? Do you think I should let you be a
Melony?”

“Why don’t you teach her how to do it?” Homer Wells asked Dr. Larch.
Now there’s a question, Nurse Angela thought, but the woman’s head moved

slightly in Nurse Angela’s hands; the woman moaned, and Nurse Angela
touched her lips to the woman’s ear. “You’re just fine, dear,” she whispered.
“It’s all over now. You just rest.”

“Do you see what I mean, Homer?” Dr. Larch asked.
“Right,” Homer said.
“But you don’t agree, do you?” Larch asked.
“Right again,” said Homer Wells.
You damn sullen self-centered self-pitying arrogant untested know-nothing

teen-ager! thought Wilbur Larch, but instead of any of that, he said to Homer
Wells, “Perhaps you’re having second thoughts about becoming a doctor.”

“I never really had a first thought about that,” Homer said. “I never said I

wanted to be a doctor.”

Larch looked at the blood on the gauze—the right amount of blood, he

thought—and when he held out his hand for a fresh pad, Homer had one
ready. “You don’t want to be a doctor, Homer?” Dr. Larch asked.

“Right,” said Homer Wells. “I don’t think so.”
“You’ve not had much opportunity to look at other things,” Larch said

philosophically; his heart was aching. “It’s my fault, I know, if I’ve made
medicine so unattractive.”

cry.

“Nothing’s your fault,” Homer said quickly.
Wilbur Larch checked the bleeding again. “There’s not much to do here,” he

said abruptly. “If you wouldn’t mind just staying with her until she’s out of
the ether—you did give her rather a wallop,” he added, looking under the
woman’s eyelids. “I can deliver the Damariscotta woman, when she’s ready. I
didn’t realize you didn’t like the whole business,” Larch said.

be happy to deliver her.” But Wilbur Larch had turned away from the patient
and left the operating room.

certainly not withering, or even faintly condemning, but it wasn’t sympathetic
either (or even friendly, thought Homer Wells). She went after Dr. Larch,
leaving Homer with the patient making her way out of the ether.

Homer looked at the spotting on the pad; he felt the woman’s hand graze his

wrist as she said groggily, “I’ll wait here while you get the car, honey.”

Larch put cold water on his face and looked for evidence of his tears in the
mirror; he was no more a veteran of mirrors than Melony was, and Dr. Larch
was surprised by his appearance. How long have I been so old? he wondered.
Behind him, in the mirror, he recognized the pile of sodden clothes upon the
floor as belonging to Curly Day. “Curly?” he asked; he’d thought he was
alone, but Curly Day was crying too—in one of the toilet stalls.

“I’m having a very bad day,” Curly announced.
“Let’s talk about it,” Dr. Larch suggested, which coaxed Curly out of the

stall. He was dressed in more or less fresh clothes, but Larch recognized that
the clothes weren’t Curly’s. They were some of Homer’s old clothes, too
small for Homer now, but still much too large for Curly Day.

“I’m trying to look nice for the nice couple,” Curly explained. “I want them

to take me.”

“Take you, Curly?” Dr. Larch asked. “What nice couple?”
“You know,” said Curly, who believed that Dr. Larch knew everything. “The

beautiful woman? The white car?”

up in his arms and sat him down on the edge of the sink where he could
observe the boy more closely.

the woman likes Copperfield—but he can’t even talk!”

appointments today.”

take the best of us.”

think I run a pet shop? Larch wondered. Does he think I let people come here
and browse?

“I don’t know how anything works,” Curly said, and he started to cry again.
Wilbur Larch, with his fresh memory of how old he looked to himself in the

mirror, thought for a moment that his job was too much for him; he felt
himself slipping, he felt himself wishing that someone would adopt him—
would just take him away. He held Curly Day’s wet face against his chest; he
shut his eyes and saw those spots he saw most regularly when he inhaled the
ether, only those spots quite harshly reminded him of the spotting he was
familiar with from his many viewings of the sterile vulval pads.

He looked at Curly Day and wondered if Curly ever would be adopted, or if

Curly was in danger of becoming another Homer Wells.

Dr. Larch comforting Curly Day. She was more worried about Dr. Larch than
she was worried about Curly; a kind of stubborn goading had developed
between Dr. Larch and Homer Wells that Nurse Angela had never expected to
see existing between two people who so clearly loved and needed each other.
It distressed her that she was powerless to intervene. She heard Nurse Edna
calling her and was grateful for the interruption; she decided it would be
easier to talk to Homer than to Dr. Larch; she’d not decided what should be
said to either of them.

Homer watched the second abortion patient emerge from the ether; he

moved her from the operating table to a portable bed; he put up the safety
rails on the bed in case the woman was groggy. He looked in another room
and saw that the first abortion patient was already sitting up, but he decided
both women would rather be alone for a moment, and so he left the second
patient in the operating room. It wasn’t time to deliver the Damariscotta
woman, anyway, he was sure. The tiny hospital felt especially cramped and
overcrowded to him, and he longed for a room of his own. But first, he knew,
he had to apologize for hurting Dr. Larch’s feelings—it had all just slipped
out of him, and it made him almost cry to think that he had caused Dr. Larch
any suffering. He went straight across the hall to the dispensary, where he
could see what he thought were Dr. Larch’s feet extending off the foot of the
dispensary bed; the dispensary medicine cabinets blocked the rest of the bed
from view. He spoke to Dr. Larch’s feet, which to Homer’s surprise were
larger than he remembered them; he was also surprised that Dr. Larch—a neat
man—had left his shoes on and that his shoes were muddy.

“Doctor Larch?” Homer said. “I’m sorry.” When there was no response,

Homer thought crossly to himself that Dr. Larch was under an unusually ill-
timed ether sedation.

“I’m sorry, and I love you,” Homer added, a little louder. He held his breath,

listening for Larch’s breathing, which he couldn’t hear; alarmed, he stepped
around the cabinets and saw the lifeless stationmaster stretched out on Larch’s
bed. It did not occur to Homer that this had been the first time someone had
said “I love you” to the stationmaster.

moved him out of the operating room. It would have been cruel to expect one
of the abortion patients to tolerate his presence, or to put him alongside the
expectant mother, and certainly it would have been upsetting to the orphans if
the stationmaster had been stretched out on one of the dormitory beds.

“Goddamn it,” Homer said.
“What’s that?” Larch asked. He was carrying Curly Day and calling to

Homer from the dispensary door.

“Nothing,” Homer Wells said. “Never mind.”
“Curly’s been having a very bad day,” Dr. Larch explained.
“That’s too bad, Curly,” Homer said.
“Someone’s come here to adopt someone,” Curly said. “They’re sort of

shopping.”

“I don’t think so, Curly,” Dr. Larch said.
“Tell them I’m the best one, okay, Homer?” Curly asked.
“Right,” said Homer Wells. “You’re the best.”
“Wilbur!” Nurse Edna was calling. She and Nurse Angela were chattering at

the hospital entrance door.

apprentice, and the next-to-oldest orphan in the boys’ division.

and the handsome young man was dispensing presents to the orphans.

“Sorry it’s not the season for apples, kids,” Wally was saying. “Or cider. You

could all use a little cider!” he said cheerfully, handing out the jars of honey,
the crab-apple and apple-cider jelly. The eager, dirty hands were grabbing.
Mary Agnes Cork, the next-to-oldest orphan in the girls’ division, was getting
more than her share. (Melony had taught her how to dominate the front of a
line.) Mary Agnes was a popular name with Mrs. Grogan, and Cork was the
county in Ireland where Mrs. Grogan had been born. There’d been a number
of little Corks in the girls’ division.

two honeys and one crab-apple down her blouse—then reached for more. A
boy named Smoky Fields had opened his jar of apple-cider jelly and was
eating it out of the jar with his hand. “It’s really good on toast, in the
morning,” Wally said cautiously, but Smoky Fields stared at Wally as if toast

was not a regular item on his diet or reliably available in the morning. Smoky
Fields intended to finish the jar of jelly on the spot. Mary Agnes spied a horn-
rim barrette on the convertible’s back seat—it was one that Candy had put
aside. Mary Agnes turned to face Candy, then dropped a second jar of crab-
apple jelly at Candy’s feet.

stole the barrette—little John Walsh observing her deft moves, admiringly. A
trace of blood, or maybe rust, on Mary Agnes’s bare shin caught Candy’s eye
and made her feel queasy; she needed to restrain herself from wetting her
finger and trying to rub the streak away. When she stood up and handed the
girl her jar of jelly, Candy felt a little dizzy. Some grown-ups were coming out
of the hospital entrance, and their presence helped Candy compose herself:
I’ve not come here to play with the children, she thought.

“I’m Doctor Larch,” the old man was saying to Wally, who seemed

transfixed by the determination with which Smoky Fields was devouring the
jarful of apple-cider jelly.

jar of Ira Titcomb’s honey. “Fresh from Ocean View Orchards. That’s in
Heart’s Rock, but we’re very near the coast—we’re in Heart’s Haven,
almost.”

seemed to spring off the boy—as distinctive, Larch thought, as fresh, crisp
hundred-dollar bills. Whose face was on a hundred-dollar bill? Larch tried to
imagine.

no need to point. Homer Wells had seen her, and only her, from the moment
he emerged from the hospital entrance. Young Copperfield clung to her leg,
but this didn’t seem to impede her gracefulness—and nothing could interfere
with her radiance. “Tell her I’m the best one,” Curly said to Homer.

was as tall as Wally. “I’m Candy Kendall,” she said to him. “I hope we’re not
interrupting anything.” You are interrupting two abortions, one birth, one
death, two autopsies, and an argument, thought Homer Wells, but all he said
was, “He’s the best one.” Too mechanically! thought Curly Day. He lacks
conviction!

“Me,” Curly said, stepping between them. “He means me. I’m the best.”
Candy bent over Curly and ruffled his sticky hair. “Of course you are!” she

said brightly. And straightening up, she said to Homer, “And do you work
here? Or are you one of . . .” Was it polite to say them? she wondered.

inexactly one of them.

introduce himself. “He’s too old to adopt.”

she thought awkwardly; she was irritated with Wally for creating such a
crowd.

business. Actually,” he added, “my mother’s business.”

What does this fool want? thought Wilbur Larch.
“Oh, I love apples!” Nurse Edna said.
“I would have brought lots of apples,” Wally said, “but it’s the wrong time

of year. You should have your own apples.” He indicated the barren hillside
stretching behind them. “Look at that hill,” he said. “It’s washing away. You
ought to plant it. I could even get you the trees. In six or seven years, you’d
have your own apples; you’d have apples for more than a hundred years.”

What do I want with a hundred years of apples? thought Wilbur Larch.
“Wouldn’t that be pretty, Wilbur?” Nurse Edna asked.
“And you could get your own cider press,” Wally suggested. “Give the kids

fresh apples and fresh cider—they’d have lots to do.”

They don’t need things to do, thought Dr. Larch. They need places to go!
They’re from some charity, thought Nurse Angela cautiously. She put her

lips close to Dr. Larch’s ear and whispered, “A sizable donation,” just so Dr.
Larch wouldn’t be rude to them.

They’re too young to give their money away, thought Wilbur Larch.
“Bees!” Wally was saying. “You should keep bees, too. Fascinating for the

kids, and a lot safer than most people think. Have your own honey, and give
the kids an education—bees are a model society, a lesson in teamwork!”

couldn’t stop babbling. He was unused to an environment he couldn’t
instantly brighten; he was unused to a place so despairing that it insisted on
silence. He was unused to absorbing a shock, to simply taking it in. Wally’s
talk-a-mile-a-minute style was a good-hearted effort; he believed in
improving the world—he had to fix everything, to make everything better.

jelly. Have they come here to play with the orphans for a day and to make
everyone sick? he wondered. He should have looked at Candy; then he would
have known why they were there. He was not good at looking in women’s
eyes, Wilbur Larch; he had seen too much of them under the harsh lights.
Nurse Angela at times wondered if Dr. Larch even knew how he tended to
overlook women; she wondered if this was an occupational hazard among

obstetricians, or if men with a tendency to overlook women were drawn to the
obstetrical field.

which might have been why, Nurse Angela thought, he seemed to find their
position in the stirrups so troubling. Funny, she thought, how he has seen
everything that Dr. Larch does, yet he will not watch me or Nurse Edna shave
anyone. He was so adamant in arguing with Dr. Larch about shaving the
women for abortions. It wasn’t necessary, Homer always said, and the women
surely didn’t like to be shaved.

“Like it?” Dr. Larch would say. “Am I in the entertainment business?”
Candy felt helpless; no one seemed to understand why she was standing

there. Children were colliding with her at hip level, and this awkward, darkly
handsome young man, who was surely her own age but seemed somehow
older . . . was she supposed to tell him why she’d come to St. Cloud’s?
Couldn’t anyone tell just by looking at her? Then Homer Wells looked at her
in that way; their eyes met. Candy thought that he had seen her many times
before, that he’d watched her grow up, had seen her naked, had even observed
the act responsible for the particular trouble she was now presenting for cure.
It was shattering to Homer to recognize in the expression of the beautiful
stranger he had fallen in love with something as familiar and pitiable as
another unwanted pregnancy.

“I think you’d be more comfortable inside,” he murmured to her.
“Yes, thank you,” Candy said, not able to look in his eyes now.
Larch, seeing the girl walk toward the hospital entrance—recognizing that

deliberate way of walking that predictably happens to someone who’s
watching her own feet—thought suddenly, Oh, it’s just another abortion,
that’s all this is about. He turned to follow the girl and Homer, just as Smoky
Fields finished the jar of jelly and began to eat a jar of honey. Smoky ate with
no apparent satisfaction; but he ate so methodically that even when he was
jostled by a nearby orphan, he never took his eyes from his little paw as it
scooped its way into the jar. When he was severely jostled, a kind of growl—
or gurgle—caught in his throat, and he hunched his shoulders forward as if to
protect the jar from other predators.

dead baby’s hands reaching above the edge of the white enamel examining
tray, which still rested on Nurse Angela’s typewriter. The baby’s hands were
still waiting for the ball, but Homer’s reflexes were quick enough; he turned
full circle in the doorway, pushing Candy back into the hall. “This is Doctor
Larch,” Homer said to Candy, introducing them while he herded them down
the hall to the dispensary. Wilbur Larch did not remember that there was a

dead baby on top of the typewriter in Nurse Angela’s office.

didn’t remember that the dead stationmaster was in the dispensary, either, and
when he saw the moron’s muddy shoes, he pulled Homer aside and whispered
harshly to him. “Have you no feeling for this poor girl?” Homer whispered
back that he thought the partial view of a dead man was preferable to the
whole view of a dead baby.

“Oh,” Wilbur Larch said.
“I’ll deliver the woman from Damariscotta,” Homer added to Dr. Larch, still

whispering.

“Well, don’t be in too big a hurry,” Larch whispered.
“I mean I won’t have anything to do with this one,” Homer whispered back,

looking at Candy. “I won’t even look at her, do you understand?”

She was a very pretty young woman, even Dr. Larch could see that, and he’d
not seen Homer so agitated in anyone’s presence before. Homer fancies he’s
in love! thought Dr. Larch. Or he fancies that he’d like to be. Have I been
utterly insensitive? Larch wondered. Is the boy still enough of a boy to need
to romanticize women? Or is he enough of a man to desire to romance
women, too?

Here’s the one with apples for brains; why is he whispering? It didn’t occur to
Dr. Larch that Wally thought, by his partial view of the stationmaster, that the
stationmaster was asleep.

“If I could have just a moment’s peace with Miss Kendall,” said Wilbur

Larch, “we can all meet each other another time. Edna will assist me with
Miss Kendall, please, and Angela—would you help Homer with the
Damariscotta woman? Homer,” Dr. Larch explained to Wally and to Candy,
“is a very accomplished midwife.”

“You are?” Wally said to Homer enthusiastically. “Wow.”
Homer Wells maintained silence. Nurse Angela, bristling at the word

“midwife”—at the condescension she quite correctly heard in Dr. Larch’s tone
—touched Homer’s arm very gently and said to him, “I’ll give you a count of
the contractions.” Nurse Edna, whose uncritical love for Dr. Larch beamed
forth ever brightly, cheerfully pointed out that various people had to be moved
both from and to various beds if a room was to be made ready for Candy.

with Miss Kendall,” he repeated, but he saw that Homer seemed riveted;
Homer was unaware that he was staring at Candy. The boy has gone gaga on
me, thought Wilbur Larch, and he saw no indication that Apple Brains

intended to leave the dispensary. “If I could just explain a little of the process
to Miss Kendall,” Wilbur Larch said to Wally (it appeared hopeless to address
Homer). “I’d like her to know about the bleeding, later—for example,” Larch
added, intending that the word “bleeding” would have some effect on Wally’s
apple-bright complexion. It did—perhaps in combination with the
overpowering atmosphere of ether in the dispensary.

Wally’s arm and pulled him abruptly away. He pulled him so quickly along
the hall and got him outdoors so fast that Wally almost escaped being sick at
all. As it was, completely owing to Homer’s good reflexes, Wally didn’t
throw up until the two of them were behind the boys’ division—on the
particular hillside Wally had suggested planting with apple trees, the very
hillside where Homer Wells’s shadow had only recently outdistanced Dr.
Larch’s.

—respecting the rows of trees Wally was planting in his imagination.

Wally wanted to talk about apple trees.

walking forty feet in one direction, then making a perfect right-angle turn.

“If she’s in the first three months,” Homer noted, “there really shouldn’t be

any work with the forceps, just the standard dilatation—that means dilating
the opening to the uterus—and then curetting—that’s scraping.”

Wally said. “Half of the trees should be Macs. I’d mix up the rest—maybe ten
percent Red Delicious, another ten or fifteen percent Cortlands and Baldwins.
You’ll want a few Northern Spies, and I’ll throw in some Gravensteins—
they’re a great apple for pies, and you get to pick them early.”

bleeding—we call it spotting, actually, because it’s usually not very heavy
bleeding. Doctor Larch has a great touch with ether, so don’t worry—she
won’t feel a thing. Of course, she’ll feel something afterward,” admitted
Homer. “It’s a special sort of cramp. Doctor Larch says that the other
discomfort is psychological.”

“You could come back to the coast with us,” Wally told Homer. “We could

load a truck full of baby trees, and in a day or two we could come back here
and plant the orchard together. It wouldn’t take too long.”

“It’s a deal,” said Homer Wells. The coast, he thought. I get to see the coast.

And the girl. I get to ride in that car with that girl.

“A midwife, gosh,” Wally said. “I guess you’re probably going to be a

doctor?”

“I don’t think so,” said Homer Wells. “I don’t know yet.”
“Well, apples are in my family,” Wally said. “I’m going to college, but I

really don’t know why I bother.”

College, thought Homer Wells.
“Candy’s father is a lobsterman,” Wally explained, “but she’s going to go to

college, too.”

Lobster! thought Homer Wells. The bottom of the sea!
From the bottom of the hill, Nurse Angela was waving to them.
“Damariscotta is ready!” she called to Homer Wells.
“I have to go deliver someone’s baby,” Homer told Wally.
“Gosh,” Wally said. He seemed reluctant to leave the hill. “I think I’ll stay

up here. I don’t think I want to hear anything,” he added; he gave Homer a
likable and confessional smile.

“Oh, there’s not much noise,” Homer said; he wasn’t thinking of the

Damariscotta woman; he was thinking of Candy. He thought of the gritty
sound the curette made, but he’d spare his new friend that detail.

Wally once and waved. A boy his own age! A boy his own size! They were
the same height, although Wally was more muscular—from sports, Dr. Larch
had guessed. He has the body of a hero, Dr. Larch thought, remembering the
heroes he had tried to help in France, in World War I. Lean but well muscled:
that was a hero’s body—and shot full of holes, thought Wilbur Larch. He
didn’t know why Wally’s body reminded him of this.

And Wally’s face? Wilbur Larch was thinking. It was handsome in a finer

way than Homer’s face, which was also handsome. Although Wally’s body
was stronger, his bones were somewhat sharper—and more delicate. There
wasn’t a trace of anger in Wally’s eyes; they were the eyes of good intentions.
The body of a hero, and the face . . . the face of a benefactor! concluded
Wilbur Larch, brushing aside a blond curl of pubic hair that had not gone
directly into the refuse bag but had clung to Candy’s inner thigh, near her
raised, bent knee. He exchanged the medium-sized curette for the smaller one,
noting that the girl’s eyelids were fluttering, noting Nurse Edna’s gentle
thumbs—massaging the girl’s temples—and the girl’s slightly parted lips; she
had been remarkably relaxed for such a young girl, and under ether she was
even more composed. The beauty in her face, Larch thought, was that she was
still free of guilt. It surprised Larch: how Candy looked as if she would
always be free of it.

girl, and so he bent once more to the view the speculum afforded him and

finished his task with the small curette.

A benefactor, thought Wilbur Larch. Homer has met his benefactor!
Homer Wells was thinking on parallel lines. I have met a Prince of Maine,

he was thinking; I have seen a King of New England—and I am invited to his
castle. In all his journeys through David Copperfield, at last he understood
young David’s first vision of Steerforth. “He was a person of great power in
my eyes,” young Copperfield observed. “No veiled future glanced upon him
in the moonbeams. There was no shadowy picture of his footsteps, in the
garden that I dreamed of walking in all night.”

“No veiled future,” thought Homer Wells. I am going to the coast!
“Push,” he said to the woman from Damariscotta. “Is Damariscotta on the

coast?” he asked the woman, whose neck was taut with straining—who held
Nurse Angela’s hand in a white-knuckled grip.

“Near it!” the woman cried, and shoved her child forth into St. Cloud’s—its

slick head captured perfectly in the palm of Homer’s confident right hand. He
slipped the heel of his hand under the baby’s fragile neck; his left hand lifted
the baby’s bottom as he guided the baby “outdoors”—as Dr. Larch would say.

delivery. Homer cut the cord and smiled to hear young Steerforth’s healthy
bawling.

Larch had seen her face at that moment, he might have detected some guilt
upon it. “Boy or girl?” she asked, her speech slurred. Only Nurse Edna heard
her. “Why is it crying?” Candy asked.

“It was nothing, dear,” Nurse Edna said. “It’s all over.”
“I would like to have a baby, one day,” Candy said. “I really would.”
“Why, of course, dear,” Nurse Edna told her. “You can have as many as you

want. I’m sure you’d have very beautiful children.”

have Kings of New England!”

felt momentarily ruffled.

Her mind drifted for a while. Why is the baby crying? she wondered. Wilbur
Larch, cleaning up, noticed another curly clump of her pubic hair; it was the
same tawny tone of Candy’s skin, which was doubtlessly why Nurse Edna
had missed it. He listened to the cries of the Damariscotta woman’s baby and
thought that he mustn’t be selfish; he must encourage Homer to make friends
with this young couple. He stole a look at the dozing girl; opportunity shone
from her like light.

And people will always eat apples, he thought—it must be a nice life.
The apple enameled on the Cadillac’s door—and monogrammed in gold—

was of special interest to Melony, who managed to prod herself into action;
she tried to steal the apple on the door before she realized it wouldn’t come
off. Mary Agnes’s arrival at the girls’ division—with her scrawny arms
hoarding jars of jelly and honey—had prompted Melony to go see for herself
what was going on. She thought, sourly, how it was typical how nothing had
been left for her—not even a glimpse of the beautiful people; she wouldn’t
have minded another look at them. There was nothing worth stealing, she
could see at a glance—just an old book; it was fate, she would think later, that
the title of the book and the name of its author were visible to her. The book
appeared discarded on the car’s floor. Little Dorrit meant nothing to Melony,
but Charles Dickens was a name she recognized—he was a kind of hero to
Homer Wells. Without thinking that this was her life’s first unselfish act, she
stole the book—for Homer. At the time, she wasn’t even thinking how it
might press him, how it might gain for her some favorable light in his eyes.
She thought only generously: Oh look, a present for Sunshine!

promised never to leave St. Cloud’s without her.

the hospital entrance, but he kept turning around to look at the hill. In his
mind, he saw the orchard at harvest time—the long ladders were in the trees,
the pickers were the orphans themselves. The bushel crates were stacked in
the rows between the trees; in one row a tractor towed a flatbed trailer already
heavy with apples. It looked like a good crop.

balance, looked where he was walking—toward the abandoned Cadillac.
Melony was gone. She’d lost her nerve. The thought of confronting that
handsome young man, alone—she wasn’t sure if she could have tolerated his
indifference. If he’d been clearly appalled by her appearance, that wouldn’t
have bothered Melony; she rather enjoyed her ability to shock people. But she
could not bear the thought that he might not even notice her. And if he’d
handed her a jar of honey, she’d have cracked his skull with it. Nobody
honeys me, she thought—Little Dorrit slipped inside her shirt, against her
thudding heart.

stationmaster’s assistant was climbing the same road, toward the hospital. At
first she didn’t recognize him—he was so dressed up. To Melony he was just
a simpleton in overalls, a busybody who tried to fashion for himself an air of
self-importance out of what Melony imagined was the world’s stupidest job:

watching for trains to arrive, and then watching them leave. The loneliness of
the railroad station depressed Melony; she avoided the place. You went there
for one thing: to leave. But to stand there all day, imagining leaving—could
there be anything sadder, or more stupid, than that? And now here was this
oaf, still wearing his year-long effort to grow a moustache, but dressed to kill
—well, no, Melony realized: he’s dressed for a funeral.

Cadillac; he’d conceived that the stationmaster’s job was his for the taking if
he exhibited a proper and adult solemnity regarding the stationmaster’s
passing. He was terrified of Dr. Larch, and the idea of pregnant women made
him feel furtive; but he had imagined that paying his respects at the
orphanage, where the stationmaster’s body reposed, was a grueling but
necessary rite of passage. The spit-up smell he associated with babies made
him nauseous, too; an unusual bravery had guided him to the orphanage,
giving his silly, young face an almost adult countenance—except for the silky
smudge that marred his upper lip and made all his efforts at manhood
ridiculous. He had also burdened himself for the uphill climb by carrying all
the catalogues; the stationmaster wouldn’t be needing them now, and his
assistant imagined that he could ingratiate himself to Dr. Larch by bringing
the catalogues as a present—a kind of peace offering. He had not bothered to
consider what use Wilbur Larch would have for seeds and lingerie, or how the
old doctor would respond to declarations regarding the peril of souls—his
own and many restless others.

and Melony. Homer, because his serenity gave him a confident, adult
appearance that the assistant felt powerless to achieve; and Melony, because
she mocked him. Now, to make a bad day worse, here was Melony—blocking
his way.

“What’s that on your lip? A fungus?” Melony asked him. “Maybe you

should wash it.” She was bigger than the stationmaster’s assistant, especially
now that she stood uphill from him. He tried to ignore her.

should have known these words were ill chosen for presentation to Melony.

she saw how lost he was, and frightened. Melony had an instinct for pressing
any advantage, but she relented when her adversary was too easy. She saw
that the stationmaster’s assistant would go on standing in the road until he
dropped from fatigue, and so she stepped aside for him, and said, “I was
kidding.”

He stumbled ahead, blushing, and had almost turned the corner by the boys’

division when she called after him, “You’d have to shave before I’d let you!”
He staggered slightly, causing Melony to marvel at her power; then he turned
the corner and felt himself uplifted by the gleaming Cadillac—by what he
mistook for the white hearse. If, at that moment, a choir had erupted into
heavenly voice, the assistant would have fallen to his knees, the catalogues
spilling around him. The same light that blessed the Cadillac seemed to shine
forth from the blond hair of the powerful-looking young man: the driver of
the hearse. Now there was a responsibility that awed the stationmaster’s
assistant!

a cigarette and intently visualizing an apple orchard in St. Cloud’s. The
stationmaster’s assistant, who looked like a mortician’s ghoulish lackey,
surprised Wally.

“I’ve come to view the body,” the assistant said.
“The body?” Wally said. “What body?”
A fear of embarrassing himself almost paralyzed the stationmaster’s

assistant. The world, he imagined, was brimming with etiquette beyond his
grasp; obviously, it had been tactless to mention the body of the deceased to
the very man who was responsible for safely driving the dead away.

read.

“A thousand what?” Wally said, growing alarmed.
“How thoughtless of me,” said the stationmaster’s assistant, bowing

unctuously and sliding toward the hospital entrance.

“Has someone died?” Wally asked anxiously, but the assistant managed to

slip inside the hospital entrance, where he quickly hid himself in a corner of
the wall and wondered what to do next. Clearly, he’d upset the high-strung
and fine-tuned feelings of the hearse driver. This is a delicate business, the
assistant thought, trying to calm himself. What mistake will I make next? He
cowered in the corner of the hall, where he could smell ether wafting from the
nearby dispensary; he had no idea that the body he wished to “view” was less
than fifteen feet from him. He thought he could smell babies, too—he heard
one bawling. He thought that babies were born while women had their legs
straight up, the soles of their feet facing the ceiling; this vision pinned him to
the corner of the hall. I smell blood! he imagined, struggling to control his
panic. He clung to the wall like so much plaster—so much so that Wally
failed to notice him when he came in the hospital entrance, worried about
who had died. Wally entered the dispensary, as if drawn to the ether—
although he quickly felt his nausea returning. He apologized to the feet of the
stationmaster.

“Oh, excuse me,” Wally whispered, reeling back into the hall.
He heard Nurse Angela talking to Candy, who was already able to sit up.

Wally barged in on them, but the look of relief on his face—to see that Candy
was not the person rumored to be dead—was so touching to Nurse Angela
that she wasn’t even cross with him for intruding.

first-person plural. “We’re feeling much better now,” Nurse Angela said.
“We’re not quite ready to jump around, but we’re sitting up nicely—aren’t
we?” she asked Candy, who smiled. Candy was so clearly glad to see Wally
that Nurse Angela felt she should leave them alone. St. Cloud’s did not have a
great and tender history regarding the presence of couples in that operating
room, and Nurse Angela was both surprised and happy to see a man and a
woman who loved each other. I can clean up later, she thought—or I’ll ask
Homer to do it.

woman back to her bed in the maternity ward, and Dr. Larch was examining
the baby Homer Wells had delivered—young Steerforth (a name Larch had
already criticized; there was some villainy in the character of Steerforth—or
had Homer forgotten that part?—and there was also a death by drowning; it
was more of a brand than a name, in Dr. Larch’s opinion). But they weren’t
talking anymore about Steerforth.

“Wally said it would take just a couple of days,” Homer Wells was saying.

“We’ll have to load a truck, I guess. There’s going to be forty trees. And I’d
like to see the coast.”

He poked Steerforth in the belly with a finger; then he tempted Steerforth into
gripping one of his other fingers; then he shone a little light in Steerforth’s
eyes.

“I’d be gone just two days,” Homer Wells said.
Wilbur Larch shook his head; at first Homer thought there was something

wrong with Steerforth. “Maybe just two days, Homer,” Dr. Larch said. “You
should be prepared to take advantage of the situation, you should not let an
opportunity pass you by—in just two days.”

Homer stared at Dr. Larch, but Larch was peering into Steerforth’s ears. “If

this young couple likes you, Homer, and if you like them . . . well,” Larch
said, “I think you’ll be meeting their parents, too, and if their parents like you
. . . well,” said Dr. Larch, “I think you should try to make their parents like
you.”

the tied end of the umbilical while Steerforth cried and cried.

days, Homer,” Dr. Larch said. “You understand, I’m not talking about an
adoption, I’m talking about the possibility of a summer job—for a start.
Someone might offer you the means to stay away for more than two days—
that’s all I’m saying—if that’s an attractive prospect.” Dr. Larch looked at
Homer; they stared at each other.

“Right,” Homer finally said.
“Of course, you might want to come back in two days!” Larch said heartily

—but they looked away from each other, as they chose to look away from the
likelihood of that. “In which case,” Larch said, washing his hands, “you know
you’re always welcome here.” He left the room, and Homer with the baby—
too quickly, again, for Homer to say how much he loved him. The cowering
stationmaster’s assistant watched Wilbur Larch take Nurse Angela and Nurse
Edna into the dispensary.

the dispensary was comforting to Wilbur Larch, and helped him say to his
loyal nurses what he needed to say.

much money as we can scrounge together, and whatever there is in the way of
clothing that looks halfway decent.”

“Just for two days, Wilbur?” Nurse Edna asked.
“How much money does the boy need for two days?” Nurse Angela asked.
“It’s an opportunity for him, don’t you see?” Dr. Larch asked. “I don’t think

he’ll be back here in two days. I hope he doesn’t come back—at least, not that
soon,” said Wilbur Larch, whose breaking heart reminded him of what he’d
forgotten: the story of Homer’s “weak” heart. How could he tell him? Where
and when?

and Wally wanted to leave as soon as possible; they had a long drive ahead of
them. And if Homer Wells is leaving me, thought Wilbur Larch, he’d better
leave me in a hurry—although twenty years, Dr. Larch knew, wasn’t what
most would have called a hurried departure. Homer had to leave in a hurry,
now, because Dr. Larch needed to see if he would ever get over it.

pad—while Wally looked at the ceiling, at his hands, at the floor. “You’re
doing just fine,” Dr. Larch told Candy. He was about to tell her that Homer
could advise her about any cramps she suffered, and that Homer could also
check her for spotting, but he wanted to leave Homer free of that
responsibility. Also, Dr. Larch couldn’t at the moment have said Homer’s
name.

packing.

“I’m not being adopted, Curly,” said Homer Wells. “I’ll be back in just two

days.”

had to turn away.

power of information that is received indirectly. For that reason, he told
Candy and Wally about Homer’s weak heart. It was not only easier for Dr.
Larch than lying to Homer; in the long run, Larch suspected, the story would
be more convincing.

just a little about his condition,” Dr. Larch told Candy and Wally. A wonderful
word: condition. The effect of the word in a doctor’s mouth is truly
astonishing. Candy seemed to forget she’d just had an abortion; the color
came back to Wally’s face. “It’s his heart,” said Wilbur Larch. “I’ve not told
him about it because I haven’t wanted to worry him. It’s the sort of condition
that could be made worse by his worrying about it,” Dr. Larch confided to
these two good-hearted innocents, who gave him their rapt attention.

violent in the way of exercise—or to anything too shocking,” said Wilbur
Larch, who had created a perfect history for someone who simply needed to
be careful—who needed to stay out of danger. Larch had given his favorite
orphan a history that he hoped would keep him safe. He was aware that it was
a history a father would construct for his son—if a father could make his son
believe it.

Homer Wells, at the moment, couldn’t construct a history or anything else

that would be soothing to Curly Day, who buried himself under several
pillows and a blanket and sobbed.

doctor!”

promise sounded less and less likely.

“They’re taking you! I can’t believe it!” cried Curly Day.
Nurse Angela came and sat beside Homer on Curly’s bed. Together they

regarded the sobbing mound under the blanket.

“It’s just for two days, Curly,” Nurse Angela said lamely.
“Doctor Larch said Homer was here to protect us!” Curly cried. “Some

protection!”

table, she’d sit with Curly until he felt better; she’d not wanted to clean up the
table while the nice young couple needed to be alone. “Your friends seemed
to be having a nice moment together,” Nurse Angela whispered to Homer
Wells. My friends! he thought. Is it possible I’m going to be having friends?

“You’re not the best one, Homer!” Curly cried, under the blanket.
“Right,” Homer said; he tried to pat Curly, but Curly stiffened and held his

breath. “I’ll see you, Curly,” Homer said.

touch; his rigid body relaxed, and he gave himself over to a steady sobbing.

simply outlasted the baby, who was now washed and dressed and almost
asleep in Nurse Edna’s arms. He had taken enough of the formula to satisfy
Nurse Edna, and so she put him in his bed and finished cleaning the room
where he’d been delivered. As soon as she’d put a fresh sheet on the table—
she was just wiping the gleaming stirrups—Dr. Larch lurched into the room
with the stationmaster’s stiff body a somewhat pliable plank over his
shoulder.

that.”

dropping the stationmaster’s body on the table. Oh, dear, Nurse Edna thought,
we’re in for a ferocious time of it.

“I don’t suppose you’ve seen the sternum shears,” Dr. Larch asked her.
“The snips?” she asked.
“They’re called shears,” he said. “If you’d just undress him—I’ll ask

Homer.”

Homer knocked before he entered the operating room, where Candy had

dressed herself, with Wally’s fumbling help, and now stood leaning against
him in what struck Homer as an oddly formal pose—as if the couple had just
finished a dance competition and were awaiting the judges’ applause.

face. “Maybe you’d like some fresh air. I won’t be long; I have to clean the
table.” As an awkward second thought, he added to Candy, “You’re feeling all
right, aren’t you?”

reassuringly at Wally.

That was when Dr. Larch came in and asked Homer if he knew where the

sternum shears were.

fetus,” he added.

“You don’t use sternum shears on a fetus,” Dr. Larch said.
“I know—I used the scissors,” said Homer Wells, who was aware that the

words “fetus” and “autopsy” fell like drops of blood on Wally and Candy.
“I’ll go get the shears for you,” Homer said to Dr. Larch.

fresh air,” he said to Wally and Candy, who took his suggestion for a
command—which it was. They left the operating room; on their way down
the hall to the hospital entrance, they would have spotted the stationmaster’s
assistant, lurking in his corner, had the assistant not been so unnerved by the
sight of Dr. Larch carrying the stationmaster’s body out of the dispensary that
he had cautiously attempted to follow this troubling vision. In his fear, he
made a wrong turn and found himself in the dispensary. He was staring at the
mud on the sheet at the foot of the bed when Wally led Candy outdoors.

“why are you in such a hurry to do the autopsy?”

his own voice. He might have told Homer, then, that he loved him very much
and that he needed something very active to occupy himself at this moment of
Homer’s departure. He might have confessed to Homer Wells that he wanted
very much to lie down on his own bed in the dispensary and administer a little
ether to himself, but that he couldn’t very well have done that while the
stationmaster had occupied his bed. He wanted to take Homer Wells in his
arms, and hug him, and kiss him, but he could only hope that Homer
understood how much Dr. Larch’s self-esteem was dependent on his self-
control. And so he said nothing; he left Homer alone in the operating room
while he went to find the sternum shears.

when he noticed the almost transparent blondness of the clump of pubic hair
that clung to his pantleg—a tight, clean curl of Candy’s especially fine hair
was caught on his knee. He held it up to the light, then put it in his pocket.

told her and Nurse Angela that there would be no hoopla of heartfelt well-
wishing upon the departure of Homer Wells—nothing that would lead Candy
and Wally to suspect that Homer Wells was even considering he might be
gone more than two days. “Nothing,” Dr. Larch had said. No hugs, no kisses,
thought Nurse Edna, weeping. Her tears had no influence on the expression of
the stationmaster, whose face remained seized by fear; Nurse Edna
completely ignored the stationmaster. She devoted herself to her misery at
being forbidden to gush over saying good-bye to Homer Wells.

“We will all appear casual about his leaving,” Dr. Larch had said. “Period.”
Casual! Nurse Edna thought. The stationmaster was down to his socks when

Dr. Larch walked in with the sternum shears.

everything away?” She yanked off the stationmaster’s socks and threw them
at Dr. Larch; then she left him alone with the body.

Homer Wells gave the operating table a thorough inspection, a final

examination—a last look. He transferred the cluster of Candy’s pubic hair
from his pocket to his wallet; he once more counted the money Dr. Larch had
given him. There was almost fifty dollars.

of the bed where Curly Day was still sobbing. She kissed Homer without
altering the motion of her hand, which was rubbing Curly Day’s back through
the blanket; Homer kissed her, and left her without a word.

“I can’t believe they took him,” murmured Curly Day through his tears.
“He’ll be back,” whispered Nurse Angela soothingly. Our Homer! she

thought—I know he’ll be back! Doesn’t he know where he belongs?

where she encountered the trembling stationmaster’s assistant.

“May I help you?” Nurse Edna asked, pulling herself together.
“I’ve come to view the body,” mumbled the assistant.
From across the hall, Nurse Edna heard the familiar crack of the sternum

shears, splitting the stationmaster’s chest. She doubted that the assistant
would care to view the body in its present state. What she said to the assistant
was, “Doctor Larch isn’t finished with the autopsy.”

“I brought some catalogues for Doctor Larch,” the assistant said, handing

the mess to Nurse Edna.

no signs of leaving. Perhaps the ether in the dispensary air was unraveling
him. “Would you like to wait?” Nurse Edna asked him. He stared at her. “To
view the body,” she reminded him. “You could wait in Nurse Angela’s
office.” He nodded gratefully as Nurse Edna pointed the way down the hall.
“The last door on your right,” she told him. “Just make yourself comfortable.”

more relaxed step as he aimed himself toward Nurse Angela’s office. He was
pleased to see there was a choice of chairs to sit in. Naturally, he would not
choose the desk chair, behind the typewriter, but there were two lower, more
comfortable-looking chairs positioned in front of the desk and the typewriter.
They were the chairs that the prospective foster parents sat in when they were
being interviewed. They were unmatched paisley easy chairs, and the

stationmaster’s assistant chose the lower, more overstuffed one. He regretted
his decision as soon as he felt how very low the chair was; everything in the
cluttered office seemed to loom over him. If Dr. Larch had been sitting at the
desk, at the typewriter, he would have towered over the assistant in his low-
sunk chair.

but he was seated so very low that he couldn’t view the pan’s contents. Two
tiny hands reached above the edge of the examining tray, but only the
fingertips of the dead baby from Three Mile Falls were visible to the
stationmaster’s assistant. He had never seen a fetus before, or even a newborn
baby; he was unprepared for how small the fingers can be. He kept looking
around the room, from his sunken and growingly uncomfortable position, but
his eyes kept coming back to the fingertips sticking above the rim of the
examining tray. He couldn’t believe he was really looking at fingers.

looking at other things in the room. He stared at the fingertips; a part of his
mind said, Get up and see what that is! Another part of his mind made his
body feel sunken into the easy chair and held down there by a great weight.

It can’t be fingers! he thought; he kept staring, he kept sitting.
Nurse Edna wanted to tell Dr. Larch that he should, for once, let his feelings

speak for him—that he should tell Homer Wells what he felt—but she stood
quietly listening at the operating room door. The stationmaster’s chest cracked
a few more times. This didn’t discomfort her—Nurse Edna was a professional
—and she could tell by the precision of the snaps she heard that Dr. Larch had
chosen to occupy his emotions with a task. It’s his decision, she told herself.
She went outside to see how that nice young couple were doing.

The young man was doing whatever young men do while peering under the

hoods of cars, and the girl was resting, semi-reclined in the Cadillac’s
spacious back seat. The convertible top was still down. Nurse Edna bent over
Candy and whispered to her, “You’re as pretty as a picture!” Candy smiled
warmly. Nurse Edna could see how exhausted the girl was. “Listen, dear,”
Nurse Edna said to her. “Don’t be shy—if you’re worried about your
spotting,” Nurse Edna said to her confidentially, “or if you have any peculiar
cramps, speak to Homer about it. Promise me you won’t be shy about it, dear.
And most certainly, if you run a fever—promise me,” Nurse Edna said.

“I promise,” Candy said, blushing.
Melony was struggling to inscribe the copy of Little Dorrit she had stolen

for Homer when she heard Mary Agnes Cork throwing up in the bathroom.

two jars of apple-cider jelly, one jar of honey and another of crab-apple jelly.

She thought it was the honey that did it.

Smoky Fields had already thrown up. He’d eaten all his jars, of everything,

and a jar belonging to one of the little Walshes. He lay miserably in his bed,
listening to Curly Day crying and Nurse Angela talking on and on.

TO HOMER “SUNSHINE” WELLS

FOR THE PROMISE

YOU MADE ME

Melony wrote. She glanced out her window, but there was nothing going on.
It wasn’t dark; it wasn’t time for the two women she’d watched arrive in the
morning to be heading downhill for their return train—to wherever.

LOVE, MELONY

Melony added, as Mary Agnes groaned and heaved again.

“You dumb little bitch pig!” Melony called.
Homer Wells walked into the operating room when Wilbur Larch had

successfully exposed the stationmaster’s heart. Larch was not surprised to see
no evidence of heart disease, no dead-muscle tissue (“No infarction,” he said
to Homer, without looking up at him)—in short, no damage to the heart of
any kind.

“The stationmaster had a healthy heart,” Dr. Larch announced to Homer

Wells. No “massive” heart attack had dropped the stationmaster, as Larch had
suspected. It appeared there had been a very sudden change in the heart’s
rhythm. “Arrhythmia, I think,” Dr. Larch said to Homer Wells.

“His heart just stopped, right?” Homer asked.
“I think that he suffered some shock, or fright,” said Wilbur Larch.
Homer Wells could believe that—just by looking at the stationmaster’s face.

“Right,” he said.

“Of course there could be a clot in the brain,” said Wilbur Larch. “Where

should I look?” he asked Homer familiarly.

“The brain stem,” said Homer Wells.
“Right,” Wilbur Larch said. “Good boy.”
When Homer Wells saw the stationmaster’s brain stem exposed, he felt that

Dr. Larch was busy enough—with both hands—for it to be safe to say what
Homer wanted to say.

“I love you,” said Homer Wells. He knew he had to leave the room, then—

while he could still see the door—and so he started to leave.

“I love you, too, Homer,” said Wilbur Larch, who for another minute or

more could not have seen a blood clot in the brain stem if there had been one
to see. He heard Homer say “Right” before he heard the door close.

In a while, he could make out the brain stem clearly; there was no clot.

if he were now speaking for Homer Wells. Dr. Larch put his instruments
aside; he gripped the operating table for a long time.

in the back seat, helped Wally raise the convertible’s top; it would be dark
soon, and especially cold for Candy in the back seat if they left the top down.

“See you in two days!” Nurse Edna said to Homer, too loudly.
“Two days,” Homer repeated, too quietly. She pecked his cheek; he patted

her arm. Nurse Edna then turned and trotted to the hospital entrance; both
Candy and Wally appeared impressed that the woman could move so quickly.
When she was inside the hospital, Nurse Edna went directly to the dispensary
and threw herself on the bed; if she had a soft heart, she had a strong stomach
—it hardly mattered to her that the stationmaster’s body had spent much of
the day on that bed, or that the mud from his boots had soiled the top sheet.

Dr. Larch was still gripping the operating table when he heard the

stationmaster’s assistant scream. There was just one scream, followed by a
prolonged series of whimpers. Homer and Candy and Wally never heard the
scream; Wally had already started the car.

deep, low chair. He had not wanted to look more closely at the contents of the
white enameled examining tray, but the little fingers had beckoned to him and
he had felt himself drawn to the tray, where a full and close-up view of the
opened-up fetus had caused him (like Curly Day) to wet his pants. He
screamed when he discovered that his legs wouldn’t move; the only way he
could manage to leave Nurse Angela’s office was on all fours; he went
whimpering down the hall like a beaten dog. Dr. Larch blocked his way at the
operating room door.

“What is the matter with you?” Larch asked the assistant scathingly.
“I brought you all his catalogues!” the stationmaster’s assistant managed to

say while still on all fours.

wrong with you?” He seized the quaking assistant under his armpits and drew
him, trembling, to his feet.

“I just wanted to view the body,” the assistant protested weakly.
Wilbur Larch shrugged. What is this fascination the world has with death?

he wondered, but he stepped aside, ushering the assistant into the operating
room where the stationmaster, with his heart and his brain stem very well
exposed, was instantly in view.

“A sudden change in the heart’s rhythm,” Wilbur Larch explained.

“Something frightened him to death.” It was not hard for the assistant to

imagine being frightened to death, although he thought that the stationmaster
appeared to have been run over by a train—or else had fallen victim to the
same evil responsible for the hideous baby upon the typewriter.

hall and outdoors that the sound of his footsteps roused Nurse Edna from her
weeping; her own crying had prevented her from hearing the assistant’s
screams or his whimpers.

she attempted to make herself comfortable on his narrow bed, believing she
was in for a long night.

Homer Wells disturbed him not in the slightest. Perhaps he appreciated that
Homer had left something behind that would need attention—busy work,
busy work, give me busy work, thought Wilbur Larch. Just before night fell,
he leaned forward in his chair enough to turn on the desk lamp. Then he
settled back in the chair in which he had spent so many evenings. He
appeared to be waiting for someone. It was not yet dark but he could hear an
owl outside—very distinctly. He knew the wild wind from the coast must
have dropped.

pass. The passenger side of the car faced the girls’ division, and Melony had
no trouble recognizing Homer Wells in the passenger seat—his profile turned
to her. He sat rigidly, as if he were holding his breath; he was. If he had seen
her—or worse, if he had needed to speak to her in order to finalize his escape
—he knew he couldn’t have succeeded in saying to her that he would be back
in just two days. Melony knew what a lie was and what a promise was, and
she knew the instant that a promise was broken. She saw a flash of the
beautiful girl with the long legs in the back seat of the car, and she supposed
that the handsome young man was driving; she had a longer, better look at the
profile of Homer Wells. When she slammed the stolen copy of Little Dorrit
shut, the ink was still wet and her inscription was smudged. She threw the
book against the wall, which only Mrs. Grogan heard—Mary Agnes was still
violently ill and too much surrounded by her own noise.

about her, went to Melony’s bed and felt her forehead, which was feverish,
but Mrs. Grogan could not coax Melony to drink anything. All Melony said
was, “He broke his promise.” Later, she said, “Homer Wells has left Saint
Cloud’s.”

paying closer attention. She allowed Melony to read to the girls that evening;
Melony’s voice was oddly flat and passionless. Melony’s reading from Jane
Eyre depressed Mrs. Grogan—especially when she read this part:

. . . it is madness in all women to let a secret love kindle within them, which,
if unreturned and unknown, must devour the life that feeds it . . .

Why, the girl didn’t bat an eye! Mrs. Grogan observed.
Nurse Angela had hardly any more success, reading aloud to the boys’

division from Dickens. Dickensian description was too strenuous for her—she
got lost in the longer passages—and when she had to keep going back to the
beginning, she saw that the boys were losing interest.

Nurse Edna tried her best with the nightly benediction; Dr. Larch refused to

leave Nurse Angela’s office; he said he was listening to an owl, and he
wanted to keep listening. Nurse Edna felt extremely self-conscious with the
benediction, which she’d never fully understood in the first place—she took it
to be a kind of private joke between Dr. Larch and the universe. Her voice
was too shrill, and startled sick little Smoky Fields out of sleep, and produced
a long, loud wail from Curly Day—before Curly returned to his more steady
sobbing.

“Good night, you Princes of Maine! You Kings of New England!” Nurse

Edna peeped. Where is Homer? several voices whispered, while Nurse
Angela continued to rub Curly Day between his shoulder blades in the
darkness.

Nurse Edna, extremely agitated by Dr. Larch’s behavior, got up the nerve to

march right down to Nurse Angela’s office. She was going to walk right in
and tell Dr. Larch that he should go give himself a good snort of ether and
then get a good night’s sleep! But Nurse Edna grew more timid as she
approached the solitary light shining from the office. Nurse Edna hadn’t
known about the fetal autopsy, either, and when she rather cautiously peered
into Nurse Angela’s office, she was given quite a turn by the gruesome fetus.
Dr. Larch just sat at the typewriter, unmoving. He was composing in his mind
the first of many letters he would write to Homer Wells. He was attempting to
gentle his anxieties and calm his thoughts. Please be healthy, please be happy,
please be careful, Wilbur Larch was thinking—the darkness edging in around
him, the supplicant hands of the murdered baby from Three Mile Falls
reaching out to him.

Ocean View

For the first two weeks that Homer Wells was gone from St. Cloud’s, Wilbur
Larch let the mail pile up unanswered, Nurse Angela struggled with the
longer and denser sentences of Charles Dickens (which had a curious effect
on the boys’ attention; they hung on her every word, holding their breath for
the errors they anticipated), and Mrs. Grogan suffered Melony’s deadpan
rendition of Charlotte Brontë. Near the end of Chapter Twenty-seven, Mrs.
Grogan could detect a bare minimum of Jane Eyre’s “indomitable” spirit in
Melony’s voice.

“I care for myself,” Melony read. “The more solitary, the more friendless,

the more unsustained I am, the more I will respect myself.”

Good girl, thought Mrs. Grogan, please be a good girl. She told Dr. Larch

that, although Melony’s reading voice depressed her, Melony should be
encouraged; she should be given more responsibility.

Nurse Angela said she’d be glad to give up on Dickens. Dr. Larch surprised

them all. When Homer Wells had been gone for three weeks, Dr. Larch
announced that he didn’t give a damn who read what to whom. He had ceased
to care about the benediction altogether, and so Nurse Edna—although it
would never feel quite natural to her—persisted with the nightly salutation to
the imagined Princes of Maine, “the dear little Kings of New England.”

Mrs. Grogan became so firmly transfixed by Melony’s reading voice that

she now accompanied Melony to the boys’ division and listened, with the
nervous boys, to Melony read Dickens. Melony’s voice was too even-pitched
for Dickens; she plodded her way—she made no mistakes but she never
adjusted her cadence; she presented bustle and sunshine with the same heavy
speech she used for gloom and fog. By her stern countenance, Mrs. Grogan
saw that Melony was analyzing as she read—but the subject of her analysis
was not Charles Dickens; Melony was searching through Dickens for specific
characteristics she associated with Homer Wells. Sometimes, by the intense

concentration on Melony’s face, Melony seemed close to discovering
Homer’s whereabouts in the England of another century. (Dr. Larch had told
Melony that Homer’s actual whereabouts were not her business.)

Never mind that Melony murdered every moment of Dickensian wit with

her ferocity, or that the rich and colorful details of character and place were
turned uniformly drab by her voice. “The girl has no lilt,” Nurse Edna
complained. Never mind: the boys were terrified of Melony, and their fears
made them pay more attention to her than they had ever paid to Homer Wells.
Sometimes the interest in the literature isn’t in the literature—the boys’
division was an audience like any other: self-interest, personal memories,
their secret anxieties crept into their perceptions of what they heard
(regardless of what Charles Dickens had done and what Melony did to him).

Not feeling completely comfortable with leaving the girls’ division

unattended while she trotted to the boys’ to hear Melony read, Mrs. Grogan
developed the habit of following the excerpt from Jane Eyre with a short
prayer that clung, both lovely and ominous, to the pale and stained bedspreads
on which the moonlight glowed long after Melony and Mrs. Grogan had left
the girls to themselves. Even Mary Agnes Cork was struck silent—if not
exactly rendered well behaved—by Mrs. Grogan’s prayer.

If Mrs. Grogan had known that the prayer was English in origin, she might

not have used it; she had heard it on the radio and memorized it, and she
always spoke it to herself before she allowed herself to sleep. The prayer was
written by Cardinal Newman. When Melony started reading to the boys, Mrs.
Grogan made her personal prayer public.

“Oh Lord,” she said in the hall light, in the open doorway, while Melony

stood restlessly beside her. “Oh Lord, support us all the day long, until the
shadows lengthen and the evening comes, and the busy world is hushed, and
the fever of life is over, and our work is done. Then in thy mercy grant us a
safe lodging, and a holy rest, and peace at the last.”

“Amen,” Melony would say—not quite facetiously, but certainly not

reverentially. She said it the way she read from Charlotte Brontë and from
Charles Dickens—it gave Mrs. Grogan a chill, although the summer nights
were warm and humid and she needed to take two steps for every one of
Melony’s, just to keep pace with Melony on her determined journey to the
boys’ division. The way Melony said “Amen” was the way she said
everything. Hers was a voice without a soul, Mrs. Grogan thought—her teeth
chattering as she sat in a chair in the boys’ division, slightly out of the light,
behind Melony, watching her broad back. Something in Mrs. Grogan’s
transfixed appearance may have been responsible for the rumor begun in the
boys’ division, possibly by Curly Day: that Mrs. Grogan had never gone to

school, was actually illiterate, was incapable of reading even a newspaper to
herself—and was, therefore, in Melony’s control.

The little boys, lying frightened in their beds, felt that they were in Melony’s

control, too.

launch into her Princes of Maine and Kings of New England refrain (even if
she didn’t know what it meant). Nurse Edna suggested that Melony was to
blame for an increase in nightmares in the boys’ division and that she should
be removed from her responsibilities as reader. Nurse Angela disagreed; if
Melony persisted in casting an evil presence, it was because she’d not been
given enough responsibility. Also, Nurse Angela said, maybe there weren’t
more nightmares: with Homer Wells gone (it had now been a month), perhaps
it was simply that Nurse Edna and Nurse Angela heard those suffering from
night terrors—in the past, Homer heard them first and tended to them.

the girl was at the threshold of a change—she might either rise above her own
bitterness or descend more deeply into it. It was Nurse Angela who suggested
to Dr. Larch that Melony might be of use.

“Of more use, you mean?” Dr. Larch asked.
“Right,” Nurse Angela said, but Dr. Larch didn’t appreciate anyone

imitating the speech habits of Homer Wells; he gave Nurse Angela such a
look that she never said “Right” again. He also didn’t appreciate the
suggestion that Melony could be taught to replace Homer—not even in
usefulness.

Edna said, “you would already have given her more to do.”

“The hospital is connected to the boys’ division,” Larch said. “It’s

impossible to keep what’s happening here a secret from the boys. But the girls
are another matter,” he concluded weakly.

“Melony knows what’s happening here,” Nurse Angela said.
Wilbur Larch knew he was cornered. He was also angry at Homer Wells—

he had given the boy permission to extend his time away from St. Cloud’s as
long as possible, but he hadn’t expected he wouldn’t hear from Homer (not a
word!) in nearly six weeks.

“I don’t know that I have the patience to work with a teen-ager, anymore,”

Larch said peevishly.

“I think Melony is twenty-four or twenty-five,” Mrs. Grogan said.
How could someone that old still be in an orphanage? Larch wondered. The

same way that I can still be here, he answered himself. Who else would take
the job? Who else would take Melony? “All right. Let’s ask her if she’s

interested,” Larch said.

blamed her for whatever sullenness had crept into Homer’s personality—and
the rebellion Homer had manifested toward him recently. Larch knew he was
being unfair, and this made him feel guilty; he began to answer the mail.

check—a rather sizable donation to the orphanage. Mrs. Worthington said she
was happy her son had been so “taken” by the good work at St. Cloud’s that
he’d seen fit to bring one of Dr. Larch’s “boys” home with him. It was fine
with the Worthingtons that Homer stay through the summer. They frequently
hired “schoolboy help,” and she was frankly grateful that her son Wally had
“the opportunity to mingle with someone his own age—but of less fortunate
circumstances.” Olive Worthington wanted Larch to know that she and her
husband thought Homer was a fine boy, polite and a good worker, and that he
seemed “altogether a sobering influence on Wally.” She concluded that she
hoped “Wally might even learn the value of a day’s work from his proximity
to Homer,” and that Homer had “clearly profited from a rigorous
education”—she based this judgment on Homer’s ability to learn the apple
business “as if he were used to more demanding studies.”

Olive wanted Dr. Larch to know that Homer had requested to be paid in the

form of a monthly donation to St. Cloud’s, minus only what she fairly judged
were his expenses; since he shared a room with Wally and could fit into
Wally’s clothes, and since he ate his meals with the Worthington family, Olive
said the boy’s expenses were minimal. She was delighted that her son had
“such manly and honorable company” for the summer, and she was pleased to
have the opportunity to contribute what little she could to the well-being of
the orphans of St. Cloud’s. “The kids,” Olive said (it was how she referred to
Wally and Candy), “. . . tell me you are doing great things there. They’re so
happy they stumbled upon you.”

accomplished obstetrician tending to her apple trees, and he grumbled to
himself about the “rigorous education” he felt had been quite wasted on
Homer Wells—given his present occupation—but Dr. Larch calmed himself
sufficiently to compose a cordial, albeit formal, letter in response to Mrs.
Worthington.

Her donation was very gratefully received, and he was glad that Homer

Wells was representing his upbringing at St. Cloud’s in so positive a manner
—he would expect no less of the boy, which Mrs. Worthington might be so
kind as to tell him. Also, that it would be nice if Homer would write. Dr.
Larch was happy that there was such healthy summer employment for Homer;

the boy would be missed at St. Cloud’s, where he had always been of use, but
Larch emphasized his pleasure at Homer’s good fortune. He congratulated
Olive Worthington on the good manners and the generosity of her son; he said
he would welcome those “kids” back at St. Cloud’s—anytime. What luck—
for everyone!—that they had “stumbled upon” the orphanage.

Wilbur Larch gritted his teeth and tried to imagine a harder place to stumble

upon than St. Cloud’s; he managed a supreme effort at concentration and
proceeded with the part of the letter he had waited more than a month to
write.

wrote. “There is a problem with his heart,” the doctor wrote; he elaborated.
He was more careful than he’d been when he discussed Homer’s heart defect
with Wally and Candy; he tried to be as precise but as elusive as he knew he’d
eventually have to be when he described the ailment to Homer Wells. His
letter to Olive Worthington about Homer’s heart was a kind of warm-up
exercise. He was sowing seeds (an infuriating phrase, but he found himself
thinking it—ever since his inheritance of the stationmaster’s catalogues); he
wanted Homer treated with kid gloves, as they say in Maine.

from Wally and swimming lessons from Candy—the latter in the Haven
Club’s heated pool. The latter—swimming lessons from that girl!—made
Wilbur Larch growl, and he concluded his cautionary advice about Homer’s
heart with the suggestion that Homer “take it easy with the swimming.”

know how to drive and swim”; Dr. Larch could do neither.

obstetrical procedure, and to be able to perform a dilatation and curettage. In
other parts of the world, they learn how to drive and swim!”

who both wept over it. They were of the opinion that Mrs. Worthington
sounded “charming” and “warm” and “intelligent,” but Larch grumbled how
it was strange that Mr. Worthington was so little in view; what was the matter
with him? “What’s his wife running the farm for?” Larch asked his nurses,
who both scolded him for his readiness to assume there was something wrong
whenever a woman was in charge of anything. They reminded him that he
had an appointment with Melony.

Melony had been working herself into a proper state of mind for her meeting

with Dr. Larch. She prepared herself by lying in her bed and reading over and
over again the inscription she had written in the stolen copy of Little Dorrit:

TO HOMER “SUNSHINE” WELLS

FOR THE PROMISE

YOU MADE ME
LOVE, MELONY

Then she tried, again and again, to begin the book through her angry tears.

The image of the staring, blazing sun in Marseilles—the oppressive glare—

was both dazzling and mystifying to Melony. What experience did she have to
help her comprehend a sun of that brightness? And the coincidence of so
much sunshine (considering her nickname for Homer Wells) was too much
for her. She read, got lost, began again, got lost again; she grew angrier and
angrier.

Then she looked in her canvas bag of toilet articles and saw that the horn-

rim barrette, which Mary Agnes had stolen from Candy—and which Melony
had snatched out of Mary Agnes’s hair and taken for herself—had been stolen
again. She marched to Mary Agnes Cork’s bed and retrieved the elegant
barrette from under Mary Agnes’s pillow. Melony’s hair was cropped too
short for her to be able to use the barrette, which she was not exactly sure how
to use, anyway. She jammed it into her jeans’ pocket; this was uncomfortable
—her jeans were so tight. She went into the girls’ shower room, where Mary
Agnes Cork was washing her hair, and she turned the hot water up so hot that
Mary Agnes was nearly scalded. Mary Agnes flung herself out of the shower;
she lay red and writhing on the floor, where Melony twisted her arm behind
her back and then stepped with all her weight on Mary Agnes’s shoulder.
Melony didn’t mean to break anything; she was repelled by the sound of
Mary Agnes’s collarbone giving way, and she stepped quickly away from the
younger girl—whose naked body turned from very red to very white. She lay
on the shower room floor, shivering and moaning, not daring to move.

“Get dressed and I’ll take you to the hospital,” Melony said. “You broke

something.”

Mary Agnes trembled. “I can’t move,” she whispered.
“I didn’t mean to,” Melony said, “but I told you to keep outta my stuff.”
“Your hair’s too short,” Mary Agnes said. “You can’t wear it, anyway.”
“You want me to break something else?” Melony asked the girl.
Mary Agnes tried to shake her head, but she stopped. “I can’t move,” she

repeated. When Melony bent over to help her up, Mary Agnes screamed,
“Don’t touch me!”

“Suit yourself,” Melony said, leaving her there. “Just keep outta my stuff.”
In the lobby of the girls’ division, on her way to her meeting with Dr. Larch,

Melony told Mrs. Grogan that Mary Agnes had “broken something.” Mrs.
Grogan naturally assumed that Melony meant that Mary Agnes had broken a
lamp, or a window, or even a bed.

“How are you liking the book, dear?” Mrs. Grogan asked Melony, who

always carried Little Dorrit with her; she’d not been able to get past the first
page.

“It starts kinda slow,” said Melony.
When she got to Nurse Angela’s office, where Dr. Larch was waiting for

her, she was slightly out of breath and sweating.

“What’s the book?” Dr. Larch asked her.
“Little Dorrit by Charles Dickens,” Melony said; she felt the barrette bite

into her leg when she sat down.

“Where’d you get it?” Dr. Larch asked her.
“It was a gift,” Melony said—which was not exactly a lie.
“That’s nice,” said Wilbur Larch.
Melony shrugged. “It starts kinda slow,” she said.
They eyed each other for a moment, cautiously. Larch smiled a little.

Melony tried to smile but she was unsure how this looked on her face—so she
stopped. She shifted in the chair; the barrette in her pocket hurt her a little
less.

with the respect and wariness you feel for someone who has read your mind.

might develop.”

Melony shrugged. “He might go to school, I suppose,” she said.
“Oh, I hope so!” Larch said.
“I suppose you want him to be a doctor,” Melony said.
Larch shrugged. It was his turn to feign indifference. “If he wants to be,” he

said.

in the chest.”

“The chest?” Larch asked. “When did you do this?”
“Not too long ago,” Melony said. “Pretty recently. I didn’t mean to.”
“How did it happen?” Dr. Larch asked her.
“I twisted her arm behind her back—she was on the floor—and then I

stepped on her shoulder, the same shoulder of the arm I twisted.”

“Ouch,” said Dr. Larch.
“I heard it,” Melony said. “Her arm or her chest.”
“Perhaps her collarbone,” Larch suggested. Given the position, he guessed it

would be the collarbone.

“Well, whatever it was, I heard it,” Melony said.
“How did that make you feel?” Wilbur Larch asked Melony, who shrugged.
“I don’t know,” Melony said. “Sick, I guess, but strong,” she added. “Sick

and strong,” she said.

“Perhaps you’d like to have more to do?” Larch asked her.
“Here?” Melony asked.
“Well, here, yes,” Larch said. “I could find more things for you to do here—

more important things. Of course, I could also inquire for you about jobs—
outside, I mean. Away from here.”

“You want me to go, or do more chores, is that it?”
“I don’t want you to do anything you don’t want to do. You told me you

didn’t want to leave, once—and I’ll never force you. It’s just that I thought
you might be looking for a change.”

“You don’t like how I read, huh?” Melony asked. “Is that it?”
“No!” Dr. Larch said. “I want you to keep reading, but that’s only one of the

things you might do here.”

“You want me to do what Homer Wells did?”
“Homer did a lot of studying,” Dr. Larch said. “Perhaps you could assist

Nurse Angela and Nurse Edna, and me. Perhaps you’d be interested in just
observing—to see if you liked it.”

“I think it’s sick,” Melony said.
“You disapprove?” Larch asked, but Melony looked genuinely puzzled.
“What?” she asked.
“You don’t believe we should perform the abortions, is that it?” Larch

asked. “You don’t believe in terminating a birth, in aborting the fetus?”

“Delivering babies—yuck,” she said. “And cutting babies out of people—
yuck, again.”

Larch was confused. “But it’s not that you think it’s wrong?” he asked.
“What’s wrong about it?” she asked him. “I think it’s sick. Blood, people

leaking stuff out of their bodies—ick,” Melony said. “It smells bad around
here,” she added, meaning the hospital air—the aura of ether, the scent of old
blood.

She’s a baby thug!

“I don’t want to work around the hospital,” Melony said flatly. “I’ll rake

leaves, or something—stuff like that is okay, if you want me to work more,
for my food or something.”

He felt miserable for how neglected the creature before him was.

barrette dug into her. “You must be stupid, or crazy.” Dr. Larch wasn’t
shocked; he nodded, considering the possibilities.

He heard Mrs. Grogan calling him from the hall outside the dispensary.
“Doctor Larch! Doctor Larch!” she called. “Wilbur?” she added, which gave

Nurse Edna a tremor, because she felt a certain possessiveness regarding the
use of that name. “Mary Agnes has broken her arm!” Larch stared at Melony,
who for the first time managed a smile.

“You said this happened ‘not too long ago’?” Larch asked her.
“I said ‘pretty recently,’ ” Melony admitted.
Larch went into the dispensary, where he examined Mary Agnes’s

collarbone, which was broken; then he instructed Nurse Angela to prepare the
child for X ray.

wet.”

“Melony!” Dr. Larch called. Melony was hanging around in the hall.

“Melony, would you like to observe how we set a broken bone?” Melony
walked into the dispensary, which was a small, crowded area—especially
with Nurse Edna and Mrs. Grogan standing there, and with Nurse Angela
leading Mary Agnes away for her X ray. Seeing everyone together, Larch
realized how old and frail he and his colleagues looked alongside Melony.
“Would you like to participate in the setting of a broken bone, Melony?”
Larch asked the sturdy and imposing young woman.

“Nope,” Melony said. “I got things to do.” She waved the copy of Little

Dorrit a trifle threateningly. “And I gotta look at what I’m gonna read
tonight,” she added.

set Mary Agnes’s collarbone. Melony tried again to comprehend the power of
the sun in Marseilles.

quivered in the atmosphere as if the air itself were panting.” Oh, Sunshine,
she thought, why didn’t you take me anywhere? It wouldn’t have to have been
to France, although that would have been nice.

the “universal stare” of the sun in Marseilles and the atmosphere of the prison
in the same town. Suddenly, she discovered she was in the prison. “A prison
taint was on everything . . .” she read. “Like a well, like a vault, like a tomb,
the prison had no knowledge of the brightness outside . . .” She stopped
reading. She left Little Dorrit on her pillow. She stripped a pillowcase off a
bed neater than her own, and into the pillowcase she stuffed her canvas bag of
toilet articles and some clothes. She also put Jane Eyre in the bag.

Mrs. Grogan’s purse—she robbed Mrs. Grogan of her money (there wasn’t

much), and also took Mrs. Grogan’s heavy winter coat (in the summer, the
coat would be useful if she had to sleep on the ground). Mrs. Grogan was still
at the hospital, worrying about Mary Agnes Cork’s collarbone; Melony would
have liked to say good-bye to Mrs. Grogan (even after robbing her), but she
knew the train schedule by heart—actually, she knew it by ear; the sound of
every arrival and departure reached her window.

knew that even the new and stupid young stationmaster would be able to
remember that, and he would tell Dr. Larch and Mrs. Grogan that Melony had
gone to Livermore Falls. She also knew that once she was on the train she
could purchase a ticket to some place much farther away than Livermore
Falls. Can I afford Portland? she wondered. It was the coast that she would
need to explore, eventually—because, below the Cadillac’s gold monogram
on that Red Delicious apple, inscribed (also in gold) against the vivid green
background of the apple leaf, she had been able to read OCEAN VIEW
ORCHARDS. That had to be within sight of the coast, and the Cadillac had a
Maine license plate. It mattered not to Melony that there were thousands of
miles of coastline in the state of Maine. As her train pulled away from St.
Cloud’s, Melony said to herself—so vehemently that her breath fogged the
window and obscured the abandoned buildings in that forsaken town from her
view—“I’m gonna find you, Sunshine.”

Dr. Larch tried to comfort Mrs. Grogan, who said she wished only that she’d
had more money for Melony to steal. “And my coat’s not waterproof,” Mrs.
Grogan complained. “She should have a real raincoat in this state.”

Dr. Larch tried to reassure Mrs. Grogan; he asserted that Melony was not a

little girl. “She’s twenty-four or twenty-five,” Larch reminded Mrs. Grogan.

“I think her heart is broken,” said Mrs. Grogan miserably.
Dr. Larch pointed out that Melony had taken Jane Eyre with her; he

accepted this as a hopeful sign—wherever Melony went, she would not be
without guidance, she would not be without love, without faith; she had a
good book with her. If only she’ll keep reading it, and reading it, Larch
thought.

The book that Melony had left behind was a puzzle to both Mrs. Grogan and

Dr. Larch. They read the dedication to Homer “Sunshine” Wells, which
touched Mrs. Grogan deeply.

Neither of them had any luck reading Little Dorrit, either. Mrs. Grogan

never would get to the “villainous” prison; the staring sun in Marseilles
outstared her, it was too powerfully blinding. Dr. Larch, who—in the absence
of Homer Wells and Melony—resumed his responsibilities as the nightly

reader to both the boys’ and the girls’ divisions, attempted to read Little Dorrit
to the girls; wasn’t the main character a girl? But the contrast between the
scorched air in the Marseilles sun and the tainted air in the Marseilles prison
created such a powerful sleeplessness among the girls that Larch was relieved
to give up on the book in Chapter Three, which had an unfortunate title, for
orphans: “Home.” He began the description of London on a Sunday evening
—hounded by church bells.

“ ‘Melancholy streets, in a penitential garb of soot,’ ” read Dr. Larch, and

then he stopped; we need no more melancholy here, he thought.

girls nodded eagerly.

mother with the heart for benefiting those who existed in (as she had written
herself) “less fortunate circumstances,” Dr. Larch wrote Olive Worthington.

My Dear Mrs. Worthington,

Here in St. Cloud’s, we depend on our few luxuries and imagine (and pray)

they will last forever. If you would be so kind, please tell Homer that his
friend Melony has left us—her whereabouts are unknown—and that she
took with her our only copy of Jane Eyre. The orphans in the girls’ division
were accustomed to hearing this book read aloud—in fact, Homer used to
read to them. If Homer could discover a replacement copy, the little girls
and I would remain in his debt. In other parts of the world, there are
bookshops . . .

Thus, Larch knew, he had accomplished two things. Olive Worthington

herself would send him a replacement Jane Eyre (he doubted very much that
it would be a secondhand copy), and Homer would receive the important
message: Melony was out. She was loose in the world. Larch thought that
Homer should know this, that he might want to keep an eye open for her.

As for Little Dorrit, Nurse Edna read Melony’s inscription and wept. She

was not a big reader, Edna; she penetrated no farther than the inscription.
Nurse Angela had already been defeated by Dickens; she blinked once,
briefly, at the sun in Marseilles and failed to turn the page.

For years Candy’s unread copy would rest in Nurse Angela’s office; those

nervously awaiting interviews with Dr. Larch would pick up Little Dorrit as
they would pick up a magazine—restlessly, inattentively. Larch rarely kept
anyone waiting past the first glare of the sun. And most preferred to scan the
odd assortment of catalogues. The seeds, the fishing equipment, the
stupendous undergarments—the latter modeled in an otherworldly way: on
those headless, legless, armless stumps that were the period’s version of the

standard dressmaker’s dummy.

bras.” But this thought led him nowhere; it fell as a fragment into the many,
many pages of A Brief History of St. Cloud’s.

Little Dorrit seemed condemned to an unread life. Even Candy, who

replaced her stolen copy (and always wondered what happened to it), would
never finish the book, although it was required reading for her class. She, too,
could not navigate past the sun’s initial assault on her senses; she suspected
her difficulty with the book arose from its power to remind her of her
discomfort on the long journey to and from St. Cloud’s—and of what had
happened to her there.

She would especially remember the ride back to the coast—how she’d

stretched out in the back seat, with only the dash lights of the Cadillac and the
glowing ash end of Wally’s cigarette shining bright but small in the
surrounding darkness. The tires of the big car hummed soothingly; she was
grateful for Homer’s presence because she didn’t have to talk to—or listen to
—Wally. She couldn’t even hear what Wally and Homer were saying to each
other. “Life stories,” Wally would say to her later. “That kid’s had quite a life,
but I should let him tell you.”

weary as she was—she couldn’t sleep. She thought about how much she was
bleeding—maybe more than she should be, she worried. Between St. Cloud’s
and the coast, she asked Wally three times to stop the car. She kept checking
her bleeding and changing the pad; Dr. Larch had given her quite a few pads
—but would there be enough, and how much bleeding was too much? She
looked at the back of Homer’s head. If it’s worse tomorrow, or as bad the next
day, she thought, I’ll have to ask him.

spoke to her, but he didn’t turn around. “You’re probably having cramps,
about as bad as you get with your period,” he said. “You’re probably
bleeding, but not like you bleed during your period—nothing near what it is,
at your heaviest time. If the stains on the pad are only two or three inches in
diameter, that’s okay. It’s expected.”

“Thank you,” Candy whispered.
“The bleeding should taper off tomorrow, and get much lighter the next day.

If you’re worried, you should ask me,” he said.

know this much about her.

allow her to be the authority.

“Then you’ve never eaten one, either,” Candy said cheerfully.
“I don’t know if I want to eat something I’ve never seen,” Homer said, and

Candy laughed. She was laughing when Wally got back in the car.

“We’re talking about lobsters,” Homer explained.
“Oh, they’re hilarious,” Wally said, and all three of them laughed.
“Wait till you see one!” Candy said to Homer. “He’s never seen one!” she

told Wally.

hurt her; she stopped very suddenly, but Homer laughed more. “And wait till
they try to talk to you,” Wally added. “Lobsters really break me up, every
time they try to talk.”

When he and Wally stopped laughing, Homer said, “I’ve never seen the

ocean, you know.”

with her brief laughter; she was sound asleep. “You’ve never seen the ocean?”
Wally asked Homer.

“That’s right,” said Homer Wells.
“That’s not funny,” said Wally seriously.
“Right,” Homer said.
A little later, Wally said, “You want to drive for a while?”
“I don’t know how to drive,” Homer said.
“Really?” Wally asked. And later still—it was almost midnight—Wally

asked, “Uh, have you ever been with a girl—made love to one, you know?”
But Homer Wells had also felt released: he had laughed out loud with his new
friends. The young but veteran insomniac had fallen asleep. Would Wally
have been surprised to know that Homer hadn’t laughed out loud with friends
before, either? And possibly Homer would have had difficulty characterizing
his relationship with Melony as a relationship based on making love.

with friends in the enclosed dark of the moving car, and what a sense of
freedom the car itself gave to him—its seemingly effortless journeying was a
wonder to Homer Wells, for whom the idea of motion (not to mention the
sense of change) was accomplished only rarely and only with enormous strife.

rather liked the idea of steering these two through the blackened world, of
being their guide through the night, and their protector from whatever lay just
beyond the headlights’ reach.

had some fun.”

and too proud to write the first letter—wondered about the “fun” Homer was
having. Swimming lessons! he thought. What does one wear for swimming in
a heated pool? How do they heat the pool, and how much do they heat it?

Maine. Although Raymond Kendall thought it was ridiculous to heat water
for purposes other than cooking and bathing, he had invented the heating
system for the Haven Club pool. It was just an exercise in mechanics for Ray.

proper response for a body to make to all that water.”

“But you don’t know how to swim, Daddy,” Candy said.
“That’s what I mean,” Ray said, winking at Homer Wells. “You set foot in

the ocean, or fall in, you’ll have enough sense never to set foot in it again—
it’s too cold!”

medicine and Homer’s early training had been surgical. He made instant
identification with the machinery with which Ray Kendall worked, both the
apple farm equipment and the mechanisms for hauling the lobsters and
keeping them alive.

was unamused by his first look at the creatures. They crammed the tank in
Ray Kendall’s lobster pound, crawling over each other, their claws pegged
shut so that they wielded them underwater like ineffective clubs. Homer knew
he had seen a good reason for learning how to swim. If one ever fell in the
sea, one wouldn’t want to fall to the bottom where these creatures lived. It
was some while before Homer learned that the lobsters did not cover the
ocean’s floor in such density as they occupied the tank. The first question that
leaped to his mind did not concern how a lobster ate or how it multiplied—
but why it lived at all.

Kendall advised Homer.

always laughed when he discussed lobster.

“The sea gull cleans up the shore,” Ray Kendall said. “The lobster cleans up

the bottom.”

“Lobsters and sea gulls,” Candy said, “they take what’s left over.”
Wilbur Larch might have observed that they were given the orphan’s share.

This occurred to Homer Wells, who discovered he could spend time watching
lobsters, with dread, and sea gulls, with pleasure—while watching both with
awe and respect.

Rock, Olive Worthington would say that Homer Wells was the only person
who ever pulled up a chair and sat down in front of the tank in Ray Kendall’s
lobster pound “as if he were watching the news on television.”

but to be out on the water and to be around Ray. Six days a week Homer
worked with Wally in the orchards. The ocean was visible from only one of
Ocean View’s several orchards but the presence of the sea was felt throughout
the farm, especially in the early-morning fog, and when a sea breeze
freshened the summer heat—and because of the sea gulls who circled inland
and occasionally perched in the trees. They were more partial to blueberries
than to apples but their presence was an irritation to Olive, who from her early
years among the clams had no love for the raucous birds, and who fought with
the gulls over the small plot of blueberries she was cultivating—the
blueberries were protected with low-hung nets, but the gulls and the crows
were smart enough to walk under the nets.

in intelligence or in personality, he observed, but in the freedom they possess
and cherish. It was in looking at sea gulls that it first occurred to Homer Wells
that he was free.

and when he finally heard from Homer, he scanned the oddly formal letter,
which was disappointing in its lack of detail. Regarding illusions, and all the
rest, there was simply no evidence.

“I am learning to swim,” wrote Homer Wells. (I know! I know! Tell me

about it! thought Wilbur Larch.) “I do better at driving,” Homer added.

Larch.) “She knows everything about apples.

takes me out on his lobster boat, and he is teaching me how an engine works.”
(Do you wear a life jacket on the lobster boat? Wilbur Larch wanted to know.
You think an engine is so special? I could teach you how the heart works,
thought Wilbur Larch—his own heart teaching him about itself, and much
more than its function as a muscle.)

“Candy and Wally are wonderful!” Homer wrote. “I go everywhere with

them. I sleep in Wally’s room. I wear his clothes. It’s great that we’re the
same size, although he is stronger. Candy and Wally are getting married, one
day, and they want to have lots of children.” (Tell me about the swimming
lessons, thought Wilbur Larch. Watch out for the swimming lessons.)

Mr. Worthington?)

He asked Nurse Angela and Nurse Edna what they thought of the name

“Senior.” They agreed it was different.

“It sounds stupid to me,” said Wilbur Larch.
Nurse Angela and Nurse Edna told him he wasn’t being fair. The boy had

departed with his blessings—more, with his encouragement. They agreed
Homer could have written something and sent it sooner than six weeks, but
they argued that this indicated only how happy he was—how busy and how
glad to be busy, too. And what experience did Homer Wells have with writing
letters, or with writing of any kind? they wanted to know.

“You want him to be a doctor, Wilbur,” Nurse Edna said, “but it’s his life.”
“Do you expect him to be a writer, too?” Nurse Angela chimed in.
“And never get married?” Nurse Edna asked dangerously.
I expect him to be of use, thought Wilbur Larch tiredly. And I want him with

me; this last wish he knew was unfair. In the dispensary, he rested from the
summer heat. All that glass and steel were somehow cooling, and the ether
fumes evaporated more slowly in the humidity. He seemed to be traveling
both farther away and for longer in his ether dreams now. When he came out
of the ether, he seemed to come out of it more slowly. I’m getting older, he
repeated to himself.

A beautiful and untouched copy of Jane Eyre arrived from Mrs.

Worthington, and Wilbur Larch read more spiritedly to the girls—the newness
of the story refreshed him. It even enlivened his weary approach to the sad
conclusion to Great Expectations. (He never believed the part about Pip and
Estella being happy ever after; he never believed that about anyone.)

Homer Wells. Homer would sketch the barest facts of his life in Heart’s Rock
and Heart’s Haven; he would give Dr. Larch a glimpse, like the far-off
visibility of the ocean from the one orchard at Ocean View where sighting the
sea was possible. He would send Dr. Larch a page, maybe two pages once a
week or every other week. To this speck on the horizon Dr. Larch would
respond with the full orchestration of the written word: questions (which
would never be answered) regarding the specificity that was lacking in
Homer’s last letter (“What precisely is the matter with Mr. Worthington?”)
and a flood of details concerning the daily grimness of St. Cloud’s. As much
as Dr. Larch disdained the gossipy instinct of Snowy Meadows for “keeping
up” with the orphanage, Dr. Larch provided Homer Wells with a virtual
alumni newsletter and with a calendar of hospital and social events. His letters
to Homer Wells were longer than his longest entries in A Brief History of St.
Cloud’s, and they were written and mailed the day following Dr. Larch’s

receipt of the most minimal scrawl from Homer.

“You can’t expect the boy to keep up with you, Wilbur,” Nurse Edna

advised Dr. Larch.

“You can’t expect him to compete with you,” Nurse Angela said.
“What the hell is wrong with this Senior Worthington character?” Dr. Larch

asked.

“Homer said it was a drinking problem, Wilbur,” Nurse Edna reminded him.
“What do you want to know—the brand of hooch?” Nurse Angela asked.
But what Wilbur Larch expected from his young apprentice was only what

he thought he had taught him: clinical analysis, the exact definition of
characteristics associated with light, medium, or heavy drinking. Are we
talking about a guy who makes a fool out of himself at parties? Wilbur Larch
wondered. Or is this something severe and chronic?

Because Homer Wells had never seen a drunk before, he was—at first—

even more easily deceived by Senior Worthington’s appearance than Senior’s
immediate family and friends were; and Homer was as ready as they were to
accept Senior’s deterioration in cognition as the natural result of alcoholism.
A man long admired in Heart’s Rock and Heart’s Haven, especially for the
sweetness of his disposition, Senior had become short-tempered, irritable, and
even aggressive on occasion. Following the incident with the grasshopper pie,
Olive wouldn’t allow him to go to the Haven Club without her: Senior had
plastered an entire grasshopper pie against the chest of a nice, young lifeguard
and needed to be restrained, then, from further smearing the pale-green
ingredients on the rump of a nice, young waitress. “He was showing off,”
Senior said of the lifeguard. “He was just standing there,” he explained.

“And the waitress?” Olive asked. Senior appeared confused and began to

cry.

“I thought she was someone else,” he said faintly. Olive had taken him

home; Wally had made up to the waitress; it was Candy who had charmed and
reassured the lifeguard.

him to have the car unless Wally or Homer went with him. Eventually, he
became lost trying to get to familiar places; Homer had to lead him back to
Ocean View from Ray Kendall’s lobster pound—even Homer, who was
unfamiliar with the network of small roads to and from the coast, could tell
that Senior had made a wrong turn.

the carburetor for the Cadillac—a simple job, which Ray Kendall had
demonstrated for him many times—Senior inhaled the gas and little carbon
particles in the tubes (he sucked in instead of blowing out).

hour through his own bedroom unable to dress himself; he constantly
confused his sock drawer with the drawer for Olive’s underwear. One
morning he became so enraged at his mistake that he appeared at the breakfast
table with each foot tightly tied up in a bra. Normally friendly to Homer and
tender to Wally and Olive, he shouted an accusation at Wally—that his own
son was wearing his father’s socks, which he had taken without his father’s
permission!—and he ranted at Olive for turning his domicile into a foundling
home without asking his permission regarding that.

“You’d be better off at Saint Cloud’s than in this house of thieves,” he told

Homer.

forgiveness; he put his head on Homer’s shoulder and wept. “My brain is
sending poison to my heart,” he told Homer, who thought it strange that
Senior didn’t seem to drink before the late afternoon—yet he appeared to be
drunk nearly all the time.

him able to observe that his silliness flourished no less ardently. Yet he would
forget to make this point to Olive, or to anyone else, until he’d broken down
and had a drink; by the time he remembered to say he had not been drinking,
he was drunk. Why do I forget everything? he wondered, and then forgot it.

(the lines of which she herself was unable to remember), and he sweetly
recalled for her the romantic evenings of their courtship; he told Wally stories
of Wally as a baby; he entertained Homer by cheerfully recounting the
planting of some of the older-tree orchards, including the lone orchard from
which the sea was visible.

“It was where I wanted to build the house, Homer,” Senior said. It was

lunchtime. Wally and Homer had been suckering in the orchard: stripping the
inner limbs off the tree or any new, sprouting branches (or “suckers”) that are
turned inward—the ones not reaching out to the sun. Wally had heard the
story; he was distracted; he poured some Coca-Cola on an anthill. Suckering
exposes as many of the limbs as possible to the light; it lets the light come
through the tree.

“You don’t allow an apple tree to grow every which way,” Wally had

explained to Homer.

“Like a boy!” Senior had shouted, laughing.
“Olive thought it was too windy for a house here,” Senior told Homer.

“Women are disturbed by the wind more than men are disturbed by it,” Senior
confided. “That’s a fact. Anyway . . .” he paused. He gestured to the sea, as if

it were a far-off audience and he meant to include it by the sweep of his hand.
He turned to the apple trees around them. . . . They were a slightly more
intimate audience, paying closer attention. “The wind . . .” he started to say,
and paused again, perhaps waiting for the wind to contribute something. “The
house . . .” he started to say.

that?” he asked Homer.

window, he could see the orchard from which the sea was visible, but the sea
wasn’t visible from Wally’s window—or from any other window in the house.

the house was going to be here. Right here,” he repeated. He looked down at
the foaming Coca-Cola that Wally was slowly pouring onto the anthill.

stinks.” Wally looked up at him; Homer nodded. “You scatter the stuff for the
field mice, but you have to find the holes and put it in the tunnels if you want
to kill the pine mice,” he said.

“We know, Pop,” Wally said softly.
“Field mice are the same as meadow mice,” Senior explained to Homer,

who had already been told this.

“Right,” Homer said.
“Meadow mice girdle a tree, and pine mice eat the roots,” Senior recited,

from his distant memory.

Wally stopped pouring the Coke on the anthill. He and Homer didn’t know

why Senior had joined them for their lunch break; they’d been suckering in
the ocean orchard all morning, and Senior had just shown up. He was driving
the old jeep that didn’t have any license plates; it was strictly for driving
around the orchards.

“Pop?” Wally asked him. “What are you doing out here?”
Senior stared blankly at his son. He looked at Homer; he hoped Homer

might tell him the answer. He regarded his audience—the apple trees, the far-
off ocean.

“I wanted to build the house here, right here,” he said to Wally. “But your

bossy bitch of a have-it-all-her-own-way mother wouldn’t let me—she
wouldn’t let me, the cunt!” he cried. “Clam-digger cunt, well-digger pussy!”
he shouted. He stood up, he looked disoriented; Wally stood up with him.

“Come on, Pop,” he said. “I’ll drive you home.”
They took Wally’s pickup. Homer followed them in the old jeep; it was the

vehicle he had learned to drive in after Wally had assured him that he couldn’t
hurt it.

Alcohol, thought Homer Wells; it sure can destroy you.
Senior had all the other symptoms, too. He was fifty-five; he looked seventy.

He had periods of paranoia, of grandiosity, of confabulation. His few
obnoxious traits—which he’d always had—were exaggerated; in his case,
nose-picking, for example. He could explore a nostril for an hour; he put
boogers on his pants or on the furniture. Olive’s vulgar brother, Bucky Bean,
claimed that Senior could have been a well-digger. “The way he roots into his
snoot,” Bucky said, “I could use him to dig a well.”

grasshopper pie, turned out to be not completely mollified. He objected to
Candy giving Homer swimming lessons in the shallow end of the pool in the
late afternoon. The pool was crowded then, he complained; swimming lessons
were regularly scheduled in the early morning—and he—the lifeguard—
regularly administered them—for a fee. He was not convinced that he should
be flexible about the matter. Homer worked at Ocean View all day, Candy
argued. In the late afternoon, when Wally played tennis after work, was the
ideal time for Candy to give Homer instructions.

was plain. It was one thing to be jealous of Wally Worthington—everyone
was—but quite another to have to suffer the attentions Candy Kendall gave to
the hard-luck case from St. Cloud’s. At the Haven Club—never in Candy’s
presence, or in the presence of any of the Worthingtons—Homer was referred
to not as the foundling or as the orphan, but as “the hard-luck case from St.
Cloud’s”—sometimes “the Worthingtons’ hard-luck case” was the way it was
put.

Ocean View, but it was nice that he and Candy could be at the Haven Club
when Wally finished playing tennis; they could then go off together, to the
beach, to Ray Kendall’s dock, to wherever. Also, at the Worthingtons’ pool
there would be Senior to deal with; more and more Olive tried to keep Senior
home, away from the Haven Club. She found she could pacify him best by
feeding him gin and tonics and keeping him in the pool—floating on a rubber
raft. But the real reason it was a bad idea (everyone felt) for Homer to learn to
swim in the Worthingtons’ unheated pool was that the cold water might be a
shock to his heart.

knew that the lifeguard at the Haven Club wouldn’t dare to complain to her;
she and Candy and Wally agreed that the unheated experience might be too
severe for Homer.

“I don’t want to be any trouble for you,” Homer said, puzzled and,

doubtlessly, disappointed that the hands under his stomach as he paddled back
and forth were Olive’s and not Candy’s. “It’s not too cold for me in your pool,
Wally,” Homer said.

“It’s harder to learn when it’s cold,” Candy said.
“Yes, that’s right,” Olive said.
“Well, I want to swim in the ocean, as soon as I learn how,” Homer told

them. “It’s a lot colder in the ocean than it is in your pool.”

which made Larch feel guilty and slightly trapped. Actually, he wrote to her,
cold water doesn’t provide the kind of shock he was anxious about; the kind
of shock associated with an accident—“for example, a near-drowning”—was
more the kind of shock he felt that Homer must try to avoid.

What lies! Larch thought, but he mailed the letter to Mrs. Worthington

anyway, and Olive found that Homer learned to swim very rapidly. “He must
have been right on the verge of picking it up when I took over from you,” she
told Candy; but in truth, Homer learned more quickly from Olive because the
lessons themselves were not as pleasurable.

prolonged it and made the lessons last the rest of the summer.

could have. There was so much about his life at Ocean View that made him
happy.

he’d come from bare wood walls and many layers of linoleum, between
which one could feel the sawdust shift underfoot. One couldn’t claim that the
Worthingtons’ walls were hung with art, but Homer had not seen pictures on
walls before (except the portrait of the pony woman); even the crowning
cuteness of the oil painting of the cat in the flower bed (in Wally’s bathroom)
appealed to Homer—and the flower-bed wallpaper behind the painting
appealed to him, too. What did he know about wallpaper or art? He thought
all wallpaper was wonderful.

varsity letters and footballs dipped in liquid gold and inscribed with the score
of an important game? And tennis trophies, and old yearbooks and the ticket
stubs tucked into the molding of the mirror (from the first movie Wally took
Candy to)? What did he know about movies? Wally and Candy took him to
one of Maine’s first drive-in movies. How could he ever have imagined that?
And what did he know about people who came together every day, and
worked together, by apparent choice? His fellow workers at Ocean View were
a marvel to Homer Wells; at first, he loved them all. He loved Meany Hyde

the most, because Meany was so friendly and had such a fondness for
explaining how everything was done—even things that Homer—or anyone
else—could have seen how to do without being told. Homer especially loved
listening to Meany explain the obvious.

He loved Meany Hyde’s wife, Florence—and the other women who spent

the summer making the apple mart and the cider house ready for the harvest.
He loved Big Dot Taft, although the jiggle in the backs of her arms reminded
him of Melony (whom he never thought about, not even when he heard that
she had left St. Cloud’s). He liked Big Dot Taft’s kid sister, Debra Pettigrew,
who was his own age, and pretty, although there was something determined
about her chubbiness that suggested she had the capacity for one day
becoming as big as Big Dot.

Big Dot’s husband, Everett Taft, showed Homer all about mowing. You

mowed the rows between the trees twice a summer; then you raked and hayed
the rows; then you baled the hay and sold it to the dairy farm in Kenneth
Corners. You used the loose hay for mulch around the younger trees. At
Ocean View, everything was used.

Homer liked Ira Titcomb, the beekeeper and the husband of Irene of the

wondrous burn scar: it was Ira who explained to Homer about the bees. “They
like at least sixty-five degrees, no wind, no hail, no frost,” Ira said. “A bee
lives about thirty days and does more work than some men do all their lives—
I ain’t sayin’ who. All honey is,” said Ira Titcomb, “is fuel for bees.”

Homer learned that bees prefer dandelions to apple blossoms, which was

why you mowed the dandelions down just before you brought the bees into
the orchard. He learned why there had to be more than one kind of tree in an
orchard, for cross-pollinating—the bees had to carry the pollen to one kind of
tree to another. He learned it should be nighttime when you put the hives out
in the orchard; at night the bees were asleep and you could close the little
screen door at the slat at the bottom of the box that contained the hive; when
you carried the hives, the bees woke up but they couldn’t get out. The hives
were light when they were carried off the flatbed trailer and distributed
through the orchards, but they were heavy with honey when they had to be
picked up and loaded back on the trailer a week later. Sometimes a hive could
be too heavy to lift alone. If the hives were jostled, the bees inside began to
hum; you could feel them stirring through the wood. If honey had leaked
through the slats, a lone bee might get gobbed up in the leaking honey, and
that was the only way you could get stung.

flatbed’s edge, he felt a vibration against the taut boards containing the hive;
even in the cool night air, the boards were warm; the activity of the hive

generated heat—like an infection, Homer thought suddenly. He recalled the
taut belly of the woman he had saved from convulsions. He thought of the
activity in the uterus as producing both a heat and a hardness to the abdomen.
How many abdomens had Homer Wells put his hand on before he was
twenty? I prefer apple farming, he thought.

At St. Cloud’s, growth was unwanted even when it was delivered—and the

process of birth was often interrupted. Now he was engaged in the business of
growing things. What he loved about the life at Ocean View was how
everything was of use and that everything was wanted.

He even thought he loved Vernon Lynch, although he’d been told how

Vernon beat his wife and Grace Lynch had a way of looking at Homer that did
alarm him. He could not tell from her look if it was need or suspicion or
simply curiosity that he saw—Grace gave out the kind of look you go on
feeling after you’ve stopped looking back.

Lynch was in charge of the pesticides, of extermination.

“As soon as there’s leaves, there’s trouble,” Vernon told him. “That’s in

April. You start sprayin’ in April and you don’t stop till the end of August,
when you’re ready to start pickin’. You spray every week or ten days. You
spray for scab and you spray for insects. We got two sprayers here, one’s a
Hardie and one’s a Bean, and both of them hold five hundred gallons. You
wear the respirator because you don’t want to breathe the shit, and the
respirator don’t do you no good if it don’t fit tight.” Saying this, Vernon
Lynch tightened the respirator around Homer’s head; Homer could feel his
temples pound. “If you don’t keep washin’ out the cloth in the mask, you
could choke,” Vernon said. He cupped his hand over Homer’s mouth and
nose; Homer experienced airlessness. “And keep your hair covered if you
don’t want to go bald.” Vernon’s hand remained clamped over Homer’s
mouth and nose. “And keep the goggles on if you don’t want to go blind,” he
added. Homer considered struggling, decided to conserve his strength,
contemplated fainting, wondered if it was true or just an expression that lungs
exploded. “If you got what they call an open wound, like a cut, and the shit
gets in there, you could get sterile,” said Vernon Lynch. “That means no more
nasty hard-ons.” Homer tapped his shoulder and waved to Vernon, as if he
were signaling something too complicated to be communicated by normal
means. I can’t breathe! Hello! I can’t breathe! Hello out there!

—the head strap raking his ears upward and tangling his hair.

“Got the picture?” Vernon asked.
“Right!” Homer called out, his lungs screaming.

He even liked Herb Fowler. He’d been with Herb less than two minutes

when the prophylactic sailed his way and struck him in the forehead. All
Meany Hyde had said was, “Hi, Herb, this here is Homer Wells—he’s Wally’s
pal from Saint Cloud’s.” And Herb had flipped the rubber at Homer.

Herb said.

ones that Dr. Larch kept at the hospital, and distributed to many of the
women, in handfuls, were sealed in something plain and see-through, like
wax paper; no brand names adorned them. Dr. Larch was always complaining
that he didn’t know where all the rubbers were going, but Homer knew that
Melony had helped herself on many occasions. It had been Melony, of course,
who had introduced Homer to prophylactics.

handling Herb’s prophylactics. When Homer touched himself, he thought
about Squeeze Louise—he imagined her dexterity with a prophylactic, her
fast and nimble fingers, the way she held a paint brush and clenched her teeth,
slapping the paint on thick on the apple-mart shelves, blowing a lock of her
hair off her forehead with a puff of breath that was bitter with cigarettes.

lay not touching himself in Wally’s room, with Wally breathing deeply and
sleeping peacefully beside him. Whenever Homer did imagine that Candy
was sleeping beside him, they were never touching each other intimately—
they were just holding tightly to each other in a grip of chaste affection.
(“Nothing genital,” as Melony used to say.)

dropped her cigarette in her lap, jumping up and furiously brushing away the
sparks, always laughing.

smoking.

blew so little back, Homer wondered where it went. The older apple-mart
women were constant smokers (all except Grace Lynch, who had resolved not
to part her lips—not for any reason), but Florence and Irene and Big Dot Taft
had been smoking so long, they appeared offhanded about it. Only Debra
Pettigrew, Dot’s kid sister, smoked with Candy’s infrequency and
awkwardness. Squeeze Louise smoked with a quick, sure violence that Homer
imagined must have been inspired by Herb Fowler’s rough-and-ready use of
rubbers.

In all of Heart’s Rock and Heart’s Haven—from the briny gurgle of

lobstering life to the chlorine security of the Haven Club pool; from the bustle
of the making ready in the apple mart to the work in the fields—there was
nothing that caused Homer a single, sharp reminder of St. Cloud’s, nothing
until the first rainy day, when they sent him, with a small crew of scrubbers
and painters, to the cider house.

Nothing about the building, from the outside, prepared him. On or in various

farm vehicles, he had lumbered past it often—a long, thin, one-story, shed-
roofed building in the shape of an arm held at a right angle; in the elbow of
the building, where there was a double-door entrance, were the cider mill and
the press (the grinder, the pump, the pump engine and the grinder engine, and
the thousand-gallon tank).

One wing of the building was studded with refrigeration units; it was a cold-

storage room for the cider. In the other wing was a small kitchen, beyond
which were extended two long rows of iron hospital-style beds, each with its
own blanket and pillow. Mattresses were rolled neatly on each of the more
than twenty beds. Sometimes a blanket on wire runners enclosed a bed, or a
section of beds, in the semi-privacy that Homer Wells associated with a
hospital ward. Unpainted plywood shelves between the beds formed primitive
but stable wardrobe closets, which contained those twisted, goose-necked
reading lamps wherever there was the occasional electrical outlet. The
furniture was shabby but neat, as if rescued or rejected from hospitals and
offices where it had been exposed to relentless but considerate use.

This wing of the cider house had the functional economy of a military

barracks, but it had too many personal touches to be institutional. There were
curtains, for example, and Homer could tell that they would have been
adequate, if faded, at the Worthingtons’ dining-room windows—which was
where they’d come from. Homer also recognized a particularly exaggerated
peacefulness in a few of the flowery landscape paintings and animal portraits
that were hung on the plasterboard walls—in such unlikely places (at times,
too high; at times, too low) that Homer was sure they’d been hung to hide
holes. Maybe boot holes, maybe fist holes, perhaps whole-head holes; there
seemed to Homer Wells to radiate from the room a kind of dormitory anger
and apprehension he recognized from his nearly twenty years in the boys’
division at St. Cloud’s.

“What is this place?” he asked Meany Hyde, the rain pelting on the tin roof

above them.

“The cider house,” said Meany.
“But who sleeps here—who stays here? Do people live here?” Homer asked.

sawyers had dreamed out their exhausted lives.

“It’s crew quarters, for the pickers,” Meany Hyde said. “Durin’ the harvest,

the pickers stay here—the migrants.”

pails. “Every year, we make it nice for them. We wash everythin’ and we give
everythin’ a fresh coat of paint.”

he thought was the women’s work—although Homer and Wally would
perform it regularly most rainy days of the summer.

“Negroes?” Homer Wells asked. “The pickers are Negroes?”
“Black as night, some of them,” said Florence Hyde. “They’re okay.”
“They’re nice!” called Meany Hyde.
“Some of them are nicer than others,” said Big Dot Taft.
“Like other people I know,” Irene Titcomb said, giggling, hiding her scar.
“They’re nice because Mrs. Worthington is nice to them!” Meany Hyde

yelled from the spattered vicinity of the cider press.

smell, but there was nothing stifling or unclean about it.

cautiously returned her smile while wondering where Wally was working
today, in the rain, and imagining Ray Kendall at work. Ray would either be
out on the choppy sea in his glistening sou’wester or else working on the
wiring of the International Harvester in the building called Number Two.

house; Homer marveled that he had not noticed her there before, that he
hadn’t even known she was part of their crew. Louise Tobey, sucking a
cigarette down to its nub and flicking the butt out the picking crew-quarters’
door, remarked that her mop wringer was “out of joint.”

“It’s jammed, or somethin’,” Squeeze Louise said crossly.
“Louise’s mop wringer is out of joint,” Big Dot Taft said mockingly.
“Poor Louise—jammed your mop wringer, huh?” said Florence Hyde, who

laughed, which caused Big Dot Taft to roar.

“Oh, cut it out!” Louise said. She kicked her mop wringer.
“What’s going on out there?” called Meany Hyde.
“Louise has got an overworked wringer!” said Big Dot Taft. Homer looked

at Louise, who was cross; then he looked at Debra Pettigrew, who blushed.

“Are you overusin’ your poor wringer, Louise?” Irene Titcomb asked.
“Louise, you must be stickin’ too many mops in your wringer, darlin’,” said

Florence Hyde.

“Be nice, all of you!” cried Meany Hyde.

found that funny. When she looked at Homer Wells, he looked away; Debra
Pettigrew was watching him, so he looked away from her, too.

house and said, “Whew! You can smell niggers in here a whole year later.”

“I think it’s just vinegar,” Meany Hyde said.
“You tellin’ me you can’t smell niggers?” Herb Fowler asked. “You smell

’em?” Herb asked Louise. She shrugged. “How about you?” Herb asked
Homer. “Can’t you smell ’em?”

“I can smell vinegar, old apples, old cider,” Homer said.
He saw the rubber sailing toward him in time to catch it.
“You know what niggers do with those?” Herb asked him. He flipped

another rubber to Louise Tobey, who caught it without the slightest effort—
she expected prophylactics to be flying in her direction hourly. “Show him
what a nigger does with it, Louise,” Herb said. The other women were bored;
they’d seen this demonstration all their lives; Debra Pettigrew looked
nervously at Homer Wells and deliberately away from Louise; Louise herself
seemed nervous and bored at the same time. She ripped the rubber out of its
wrapper and stuck her index finger in it—her fingernail poked out the rubber,
her nail’s fine edge next to the nipplelike end.

“One year I told the niggers that they should just stick their joints into these

rubbers if they didn’t want to be catchin’ diseases or havin’ any new babies,”
Herb said. He grabbed Louise’s finger in the rubber sheath and held it out for
everyone to see. “And the next year, all the niggers told me that the rubbers
didn’t work. They said they stuck their fingers in there, like I showed ’em,
and they still got diseases and new babies every time they turned around!”

No one laughed; no one believed it; it was an old joke to all of them, except

to Homer Wells; and the idea of people having babies every time they turned
around was not especially funny to Homer.

Road for a hot lunch, Homer said he didn’t want to go; Mrs. Worthington
made his lunch, and Wally’s, every morning, and Homer felt obliged to eat his
—he always enjoyed it. He also knew the crew was not supposed to leave the
orchards for a lunch break, especially not in any of the Ocean View vehicles,
and Herb Fowler was driving the green van that Olive used most often. It
wasn’t a hard rule, but Homer knew that if Wally had been working in the
cider house Herb wouldn’t have suggested it.

glanced into the long room with the two rows of narrow beds, he thought how
much the rolled mattresses and blankets resembled people sleeping there—

except the shapes upon the iron beds were too still to be sleepers. They are
like bodies waiting to be identified, thought Homer Wells.

Even though it was raining, he went outside to look at the collection of dead

cars and junked tractor-and-trailer parts that festooned the dirt driveway in
front of the cider house. In the back was a churned-up area of discolored
weeds where the mash, or the pomace, was flung after the press. A pig farmer
from Waldoboro drove all the way just to have it, Meany Hyde had told
Homer; the mash was great for pigs.

looked at a map of the United States; he had seen a globe, but it was a crude
one—the states weren’t marked. He knew South Carolina was a long way
south; the Negroes came from there in trucks, Meany Hyde had said, or they
drove their own cars, but some of their cars were so old and beaten up that
they died here; Meany wasn’t sure how all the Negroes got back to South
Carolina.

when it’s peach time somewhere else, and apples here. They travel around,
just pickin’ things.”

house; the gull was so drawn in upon itself that Homer was reminded it was
raining and went back inside.

the pillow and the blanket under his head. Something invited him to smell the
blanket and the pillow, but he could detect nothing more than the aura of
vinegar and a scent he categorized as simply old. The blanket and pillow felt
more human than they smelled, but the deeper he pushed his face into them,
the more human their smell became. He thought about the strain on Louise
Tobey’s face, and how her finger had stretched itself out in the rubber, and the
way her nail had looked ready to slice through. He recalled the mattress in the
sawyers’ lodge in St. Cloud’s, where Melony had introduced him to the way
he felt now. He took himself out of his work jeans and masturbated quickly,
the springs of the old iron bed creaking sharply. Something in his vision
seemed clearer after he had finished. When he sat up on the bed, he spotted
the other body that had taken the liberty of resting in the cider house. Even
with her body curled so tightly in upon itself—like the gull in the rain or like
a fetus or like a woman with cramps—Homer had no trouble recognizing
Grace Lynch.

direction, she surely could not have mistaken the rhythm of the old bed
springs—or even, Homer thought, the detectable sharpness of the odor of the

semen he cupped in his hand. He stepped quietly outdoors and held his hand
out in the rain. The sea gull, still huddled on the cider house roof, took a
sudden interest in him—there was a history of successful scavenging
associated with this place. When Homer went back in the cider house, he saw
that Grace Lynch had fixed her mattress the way it had been and was standing
by the window with her face pressed into the curtain. You had to look twice to
see Grace Lynch; he wouldn’t have seen her standing there if he hadn’t
already known she was in the room.

you come from,” she explained. “I been there—I don’t know how you
managed a night’s sleep.”

the rainy day provided at that window; she drew the faded curtain around her
narrow shoulders like a shawl. She wouldn’t look at Homer Wells, and
nothing in her brittle, shivering stance could have been interpreted as
beckoning, yet Homer felt himself drawn to her—in the way we are urged,
especially in gloomy weather, to seek the familiar. In St. Cloud’s, one grew
accustomed to victims, and the attitude of a victim shone stronger than
reflected sunlight from Grace Lynch. Homer felt such a contradictory glow
shining forth from her that he was impelled to go to her and hold her limp,
damp hands.

“Funny,” she whispered, still not looking at him. “It was so awful there, but

I felt real safe.” She put her head on his chest and stuck her sharp knee
between his legs, twisting her bony hip into him. “Not like here,” she
whispered. “It’s dangerous here.” Her thin bony hand slipped into his pants,
as skittish as a lizard.

saved him. Like a startled cat, Grace sprang crazily away from him. When
they all came through the door, she was digging the grit from a seam in the
linoleum on the kitchen counter—using a wire brush that Homer hadn’t
noticed she’d had in her hip pocket. Like so much of Grace Lynch, it had been
concealed. But the tension in the look she gave him at quitting time—when he
rode back to the apple mart on Big Dot Taft’s jolly lap—was enough to tell
Homer Wells that whatever was “dangerous” had not deserted Grace Lynch
and that he could travel far but never so far that the victims of St. Cloud’s
would ever desert him.

The night after Grace Lynch attacked him, Homer had his first date with
Debra Pettigrew; it was also the first time he went to the drive-in movie with
Candy and Wally. They all went in Senior’s Cadillac. Homer and Debra

Pettigrew sat in the splotched back seat where only a couple of months ago
poor Curly Day had lost control of himself; Homer was unaware that the
purpose of drive-in movies was, ultimately, for losing control of oneself in the
back seats of cars.

“Homer’s never been to a drive-in before,” Wally announced to Debra

Pettigrew when they picked her up. The Pettigrews were a large family who
kept dogs—many dogs, mostly chained; some were chained to the bumpers of
the several undriven, believed-to-be-dead cars that so permanently occupied
the front lawn that the grass grew through the drive shafts and the axle
bearings. As Homer stepped gingerly around the snapping dogs en route to
Debra’s front door, the dogs lunged against the unbudging cars.

fetching chubbiness was but a slight reminder of the family’s potential for
girth. At the door, Debra’s mother greeted Homer massively—she of the
monstrous genes responsible for the likes of Debra’s sister, Big Dot Taft.

she said to Homer. “I’ve heard all about how nice you are, and what good
manners you’ve got—please excuse the mess.” Debra, blushing beside her,
tried to hurry Homer outside as forcefully as her mother wished to usher him
in. He glimpsed several huge people—some with remarkably swollen faces,
as if they’d lived half their lives underwater or had survived incredible
beatings; all with wide, friendly smiles, which contradicted the untold
viciousness of the dogs barking in such a frenzy at Homer’s back.

“We have to go, Mom,” Debra whined, shoving Homer out the door. “We

can’t be late.”

laughter; coughs followed, which were followed by labored sighing before the
dogs erupted in such force that Homer thought the noise of them would be
sufficient to keep him and Debra from ever reaching the Cadillac.

second.

shout to be heard over the dogs.

“I’ve never been to a movie before,” Homer admitted.
“Gosh,” said Debra Pettigrew. She smelled nice; she was much neater and

cleaner than she looked in her apple-mart clothes; Debra dressed with a
certain pert orderliness for working, too. Her chubbiness was restrained, and
as they drove to Cape Kenneth, her usual good nature emerged so warmly that
even her shyness disappeared—she was a fun girl, as they say in Maine. She
was nice-looking, relaxed, good-humored, hardworking and not very smart.

Her prospects, at best, included marriage to someone pleasant and not a great
deal older or smarter than herself.

overcrowded, mucky shore of Drinkwater Lake; they’d managed to make the
new place look lived-in—on its rapid way to ramshackle—almost instantly.
The lawn had appeared to grow its dead cars overnight, and the dogs had
survived the move from the Pettigrews’ winter house in Kenneth Corners
without losing a bit of their territorial savagery. Like all the cottages around
Drinkwater Lake, the Pettigrews’ had been named—as if the houses
themselves were orphans, delivered incomplete and in need of further
creation. The Pettigrews’ house was named “All of Us!”

they pulled up at the car-and-dog lot. “As if they’re proud of their
overpopulation.” But Wally was very respectful once Debra joined them in
the car.

This mannerism of what he’d seen of society struck Homer Wells quite

forcefully; people, even nice people—because, surely, Wally was nice—
would say a host of critical things about someone to whom they would then
be perfectly pleasant. At St. Cloud’s, criticism was plainer—and harder, if not
impossible, to conceal.

The drive-in movie in Cape Kenneth was nearly as new to Maine as the

Haven Club’s heated pool and was a lot less practical. Drive-in movies would
never be a great idea for Maine; the night fog along the coast lent to many a
joyful film the inappropriately ghoulish atmosphere of a horror movie. In later
years, people groping for rest rooms and the snack bar would fail to find their
cars when they attempted to return to them.

first drive-in movie, the hum of the mosquitoes in the night air of Cape
Kenneth was far more audible than the sound track. Wally was relatively
successful in preventing the mosquitoes from taking over the car because he
always brought with him an aerosol pump sprayer with which he frequently
doused the car—and the air surrounding the cars. The pump can was loaded
with the insecticide they sprayed the apples with. Thus the air in and
surrounding the Cadillac was rendered poisonous and foul but fairly free of
mosquitoes. The hiss and stench of the spray aroused frequent complaints
from Wally’s fellow moviegoers in the cars nearest the Cadillac—until they
were being bitten so badly by mosquitoes that they stopped protesting; some
of them politely asked if they could borrow the device for the purpose of
poisoning their own cars.

were no rest rooms. The men and boys took turns urinating against a dank
cement wall at the rear of the drive-in pit; atop the wall were perched several
small and uncouth boys (Cape Kenneth locals, too young or too poor for
cars), who used the wall to watch the movie even though they were well
beyond the possibility of hearing it. Occasionally, when the movie was
dissatisfying, they peed from the top of the wall onto the luckless people who
were peeing against it.

were better behaved than the men and boys—the women drank less, for
example, although their behavior inside the cars could not be monitored.

It was wondrous—this whole experience—for Homer Wells. He was

especially acute at noticing what human beings did for pleasure—what (there
could be no mistake about it) they chose to do—because he had come from a
place where choice was not so evident, and examples of people performing
for pleasure were not plentiful. It amazed him that people suffered drive-in
movies by choice, and for pleasure; but he believed that, if he failed to see the
fun in it, it was entirely his failure.

their horns and blinked their headlights and exhibited other less endearing
forms of impatience—Homer heard what was, unmistakably, the sound of
someone vomiting against a fender—a gigantic image filled the sky. It is
something’s mouth! thought Homer Wells. The camera backed, or rather,
lurched away. Something’s head—a kind of horse! thought Homer Wells. It
was a camel, actually, but Homer Wells had never seen a camel, or a picture
of one; he thought it was a horribly deformed horse—a mutant horse! Perhaps
some ghastly fetus-phase of a horse! The camera staggered back farther.
Mounted by the camel’s grotesque hump was a black-skinned man almost
entirely concealed in white wrapping—bandages! thought Homer Wells. The
ferocious black Arab nomad brandished a frightening curved sword;
whacking the lumbering camel with the flat of the blade, he drove the beast
into a faulty, staggering gallop across such endless sand dunes that the animal
and its rider were soon only a speck on the vast horizon. Suddenly, music!
Homer jumped. Words! The titles, the names of the actors were written in the
sand by an invisible hand.

desert, the credits—everything!

“Some dumb Bedouin, I think,” Wally said.
A Bedouin? thought Homer Wells.
“It’s a kind of horse?” he asked.
“What horse?” asked Debra Pettigrew.

“The animal,” Homer said, sensing his mistake.
Candy turned around in the front seat and looked at Homer with

heartbreaking affection. “That’s a camel, Homer,” she said.

“You’ve never seen a camel!” Wally shouted.
“Well, where would he see a camel?” Candy snapped at him.
“I was just surprised,” Wally said defensively.
“I’ve never seen a Negro, either,” Homer said. “That was one, wasn’t it?—

on the camel.”

“A Negro Bedouin, I guess,” Wally said.
“Gosh,” said Debra Pettigrew, who looked at Homer a little fearfully, as if

she suspected him of simultaneously existing on another planet, in another
life-form.

Then the credits were over. The black man on the camel was gone and

would never be seen again. The desert was also gone; apparently, it had
served its uncertain function—it would never be seen again, either. It was a
pirate movie. Great ships were blasting each other with cannons; swarthy men
with uncut hair and baggy pants were doing terrible things to nicer-looking
men, who were better-dressed. None of the men was black. Perhaps the
camel’s rider had been a kind of omen, thought Homer Wells. His exposure to
storytelling, through Charles Dickens and Charlotte Brontë, had ill prepared
him for characters who came from and traveled nowhere—or for stories that
made no sense.

The pirates stole a chest of coins and a blond woman from the ship of

pleasanter aspect before they sank the ship and sailed away in their own foul
vessel, on which they coarsely attempted to make merry with drunkenness
and song. They appeared to enjoy leering at the woman, and taunting her, but
some mysterious and totally unseen force kept them from actually harming
her—for a whole hour, during which they harmed nearly everyone else and
many of themselves. The woman, however, was reserved for more teasing,
yet she protested her fate bitterly, and Homer had the feeling that he was
supposed to lament for her.

A man who apparently adored the complaining woman pursued her across

the ocean, through burning harbor towns and charmless inns of suggested but
never visualized lewdness. As the fog rolled in, there was much of the movie
that was never visualized, although Homer remained riveted to the image in
the sky. He was only partially aware that Wally and Candy were uninterested
in the movie; they had slumped from sight in the front seat and only
occasionally did Candy’s hand appear, gripping—or lolling on—the back of
the seat. Twice Homer heard her say, “No, Wally,” once with a firmness he
had never heard in her voice before. Wally’s frequent laughter continued at

intervals, and he whispered and murmured and gurgled in his throat.

the pirate movie than he was; when he looked at her, he was surprised to find
her looking at him. Not critically but not very affectionately either. She
appeared to be more and more amazed to see him, as the picture went on and
on. Once she touched his hand; he thought she wanted something, and
regarded her politely. She just stared at him; he looked back at the movie.

were always breaking into her room despite her efforts; they seemed to break
into her room for the single purpose of demonstrating to her that she couldn’t
bar them out. Once in the room, they taunted her in the usual fashion and then
retreated—whereupon she attempted to bar their way again.

hour had passed. Candy sat up in the front seat and looked at him, her genuine
concern quite apparent despite the wild tangle her hair was in.

“What have you missed?” Wally asked—sleepily, Homer thought.
Debra Pettigrew, prettily, leaned close to Homer and whispered in his ear. “I

think you’ve missed me,” she said. “I think you’ve forgotten I’m here.”

a particularly uncomprehending way. Debra kissed him, very neatly—very
dryly—on his mouth. She sat back in the seat and smiled at him.

“Your turn,” she said.
Wally, at this moment, opened the front door and sprayed lethal fumes all

around the Cadillac—much of the stuff drifting back through the open door.
Candy and Wally, and Debra, too, coughed in a very dramatic fashion, but
Homer stared at Debra Pettigrew—the idea of the drive-in movie slowly
coming to him.

settled himself more comfortably beside her, and she put her head on his
shoulder, one hand on his chest. He put one hand on her chest, but she pushed
it away. He knew he was still missing something, but he proceeded,
tentatively, to discover the rules. He kissed her neck; this was acceptable—
she snuggled against his neck and something new and daring (and wet) licked
him at the throat (her tongue!); Homer permitted his tongue to venture into
the poisoned air. He took a moment, contemplating the uses of his tongue; he
decided to kiss her on her mouth and to suggest, gently, the application of his
tongue there, but this was somewhat tensely rejected—her own tongue pushed
his away; her teeth blocked further entry.

hips was allowed to remain there; the hand on her thigh, in her lap, was
moved on. She put her arms around him and hugged him; her kisses were
friendly and sweet; he began to feel like a well-treated pet—certainly better
treated than most of the Pettigrew dogs.

then Debra giggled and cuddled against him. By straining his neck and rolling
his eyes toward the back of his head, Homer Wells could manage to see the
movie.

of bondage; the stupid woman had barred herself in again, but this time she
was attempting to keep herself untouched by her rescuer. It was quite
frustrating to watch him hack and flail at her door.

From one of the cars in the hazardous fog around them, someone yelled,

“Leave her!” Another person cried, “Kill her!” All Homer felt sure of was that
no one would ever fuck her—she seemed protected from both sex and death
by something as shifty as the Cape Kenneth fog—nor would any of them in
the Cadillac pursue much adventure beyond the pleasure afforded to cherished
household pets.

—and Nurse Edna and Nurse Angela had for him, too. When the movie was
over, he realized he was crying; he realized that although he loved where he
was, he loved Dr. Larch more than anyone else—at this point in his life, he
still loved Larch more than he loved Candy—and he realized that he missed
Larch, too—while at the same time he hoped he would never again set foot in
St. Cloud’s.

Pettigrew mistook the cause; she thought the movie had moved him to tears.

leaned over the front seat. Candy touched his head.

“It’s okay. You can cry. I cry at lots of movies,” she said.
Even Wally was deeply respectful. “Hey, buddy,” he said. “We know this

must all be a shock to you.” His poor heart, sweet Wally was thinking. You
dear boy, Candy thought, please watch out for your heart. She put her cheek
against Homer’s cheek and kissed him near his ear. It was a very sudden
surprise to her, how much she enjoyed that kiss of friendship; it surprised
Homer Wells, too. Despite the little dry kisses that Debra Pettigrew gave him
in abundance, he felt a remarkable difference surge through him at the instant
of Candy’s kissing him. It was a feeling that rushed him from nowhere—and
he knew, looking at Wally’s fond and handsome face, that it was a feeling
with nowhere to go. Was that what love was, and how it came to you—

leaving you no options for its use? Like the black-skinned nomad on the
camel: where did he belong in a movie about pirates?

Wells. What was he called?

her dogs, he asked Wally. Homer sat up front in the Cadillac—Candy in the
middle of the seat between them.

“A Bedouin,” Wally said.
I’m a Bedouin! thought Homer Wells.
When Candy fell asleep, she slumped against Wally’s shoulder, but this

bothered his driving; he pushed her very gently in Homer’s direction. The rest
of the way to Heart’s Haven, she slept with her head on Homer’s shoulder, her
hair lightly touching his face. When they got to Ray Kendall’s lobster pound,
Wally shut off the car and whispered, “Hey, Sleepy.” He kissed Candy on the
lips, which woke her up. She sat bolt upright, for a second disoriented, and
she looked accusingly at both Wally and Homer, as if she weren’t sure which
one of them had kissed her. “Easy,” Wally said to her, laughing. “You’re
home.”

Home, thought Homer Wells. He knew that for the Bedouin—come from

nowhere, going nowhere—there was no home.

In August of that same summer another Bedouin left what had been home for
him; Curly Day departed St. Cloud’s for Boothbay, where a young druggist
and his wife had recently moved and had plunged into a life of community
service. Dr. Larch had his doubts about the young couple, but he had more
doubts regarding Curly Day’s resilience to another winter in St. Cloud’s. The
end of the summer was the last good time for visits from adoptive families;
the good weather in the early fall was brief. And Curly’s general positivism
had been in decline since the departure of Homer Wells; Curly could never be
convinced that Homer had not somehow stolen the beautiful couple whom a
kinder fate had intended for him.

The druggist and his wife were not a beautiful couple. They were well off

and good-hearted; but they had not been born to a life of ease, and it seemed
unlikely that they would ever adjust to anything resembling gracious living.
They had striven to their station in life, and their idea of helping their fellow
man seemed rooted in the notion that their fellow man should be taught how
to strive. They had requested an older orphan; they wanted someone capable
of doing a few hours’ work in the drugstore after school.

They saw their childlessness as entirely God’s decision and agreed that God

had meant for them to find a foundling and educate him in the methods of

self-support and self-improvement, for which the foundling would be broadly
rewarded by inheriting the young couple’s pharmacy, and with it the means to
care for them in their apparently eagerly anticipated old age.

for Larch their earlier efforts to have a child of their own. Before he met the
couple—at a time when he had only corresponded with them by mail—Larch
had hoped he might persuade them to allow Curly to keep his first name.
When an orphan gets to be as old as Curly, Larch argued, the name has more
than casual significance. But Larch’s hopes sank when he saw the couple; the
young man was prematurely bald—so perfectly bald that Larch wondered if
the fellow had not suffered from the application of an untested pharmaceutical
product—and the young wife’s hair was fine and lank. The couple seemed
shocked at the wealth of Curly Day’s curly hair, and Larch imagined that their
first family trip would probably include a visit to the barber.

unenthusiastic about his name, yet he wanted to leave St. Cloud’s—badly.
Larch saw that the boy still hoped for an adoption as dazzling as the one he’d
imagined, for a couple as glittering with the promise of another life as Candy
and Wally were. Of the very plain young couple from Boothbay, Curly Day
said to Dr. Larch: “They’re okay. They’re nice, I guess. And Boothbay is on
the coast. I think I’d like the ocean.”

be a boating couple, or a beach couple, or even a fishing-off-a-dock couple;
he suspected them of thinking that a life of playing with, on, or in the sea was
frivolous, something for tourists. (Larch thought that way himself.) Larch
expected that the drugstore remained open every daylight hour of the summer,
and that the hardworking young couple remained in the store every minute—
selling tanning oil to summer people while they themselves stayed as pale as
the winter, and were proud of it.

there’ll be lots of pills and cough medicines around.”

“He’ll still be Curly to me,” Nurse Angela said defiantly.
Worse, Larch imagined: he’ll always be Curly to Curly. But Larch let him

go; it was high time for him to be gone—that was the main reason.

The couple’s name was Rinfret; they called Curly “Roy.” And so Roy

“Curly” Rinfret took up residence in Boothbay. Rinfret’s Pharmacy was a
harborfront store; the family lived several miles inland, where the sea was out
of sight. “But not out of scent,” Mrs. Rinfret had maintained; she declared
that, when the wind was right, the ocean could be smelled from the house.

Not with Curly’s nose, Dr. Larch imagined: Curly’s nose was such a

constant streamer, Dr. Larch suspected that Curly had no sense of smell at all.

one evening in August in 194_—over David Copperfield’s steady sobs.
“Curly Day has found a family,” Dr. Larch said. “Good night, Curly!”

“G’night, Burly!” young Copperfield cried.
When Homer Wells received the letter telling him the news of Curly’s

adoption, he read it again and again—in the moonlight streaming through
Wally’s window, while Wally slept.

talk about it with Wally and Candy. They’d sat in the moonlight, earlier that
evening, throwing snails off Ray Kendall’s dock. Ploink! Ploink! went the
periwinkles; Homer Wells talked and talked. He told them about the litany
—“Let us be happy for Curly Day,” and so forth; he tried to explain how it
had felt to be addressed as a Prince of Maine, as a King of New England.

“I guess I imagined someone who looked like you,” Homer said to Wally.
Candy remembered that Dr. Larch had said this to her, too: that he’d told her

that her babies would be these princes, these kings. “But I didn’t know what
he meant,” she said. “I mean, he was nice—but it was unimaginable.”

“It still is unimaginable to me,” Wally said. “I mean, what you saw,” he said

to Homer. “What all of you imagined—it must have been different, for each
of you.” Wally was unwilling to accept the notion that someone who looked
like himself would ever be adequate to the expression.

“It sounds a little mocking,” Candy said. “I just can’t see what he meant.”
“Yeah,” Wally agreed. “It sounds a little cynical.”
“Maybe it was,” said Homer Wells. “Maybe he said it for himself and not

for us.”

breath and told them about Fuzzy Stone; he imitated the breathing contraption
admirably—he had them both so roaring with laughter at the racket he was
making that they drowned out the insignificant ploink of the snails dropping
into the sea. Wally and Candy didn’t know they were at the end of the story
until Homer simply arrived at it. “Fuzzy Stone has found a new family,” he
repeated to them. “Good night, Fuzzy,” he concluded hollowly.

posts; the boats moored around them rocked on the water. When a line was
pulled taut and yanked out of the water, you could hear the water drip off the
line; when the thicker ropes were stretched, they made a noise like grinding
teeth.

it,” Homer said, “and a circumcision is no big deal—it’s really easy.” Wally
felt his own penis inch toward itself like a snail. Candy felt a cramp knot in
her calf and she stopped swinging her legs off the edge of the dock; she drew
her heels up to her buttocks and hugged her knees. “Curly was the first one,”
Homer said. “I made it a little lopsided,” he confessed.

“We could drive up to Boothbay and see how he’s doing,” Wally suggested.
What would we see? Candy wondered. She imagined Curly peeing all over

the Cadillac again, and telling them again that he was the best one.

“I don’t think that would be a good idea,” Homer said.
He went with Wally back to Ocean View and wrote Dr. Larch a long letter—

his longest so far. He tried to tell Larch about the drive-in movie, but the letter
degenerated into a critique of the movie itself, and so he tried to change the
subject.

Should he tell him about Herb Fowler carrying all the prophylactics?

(Although Dr. Larch approved of everyone using prophylactics, he would
hardly have approved of Herb Fowler.) Should he tell Larch that he had
learned the real purpose of the drive-in? Wasn’t it to tease oneself and one’s
date into a state of sexual frenzy—which neither of you were allowed to act
upon? (Dr. Larch would certainly not think highly of that.) Should he tell Dr.
Larch what Grace Lynch had said and done, or how he dreamed about her—
or how he imagined he was falling in love, or already had fallen in love, with
Candy (which he knew was forbidden)? And how do I say, “I miss you”? he
wondered—when I don’t mean, “I want to come back!”?

And so he ended the letter in his fashion; he ended it inexactly. “I remember

when you kissed me,” he wrote to Dr. Larch. “I wasn’t really asleep.”

Why didn’t I kiss him more—why not all the time? In other parts of the
world, he dreamed, they have drive-in movies!

He always used more ether than he should have before the annual meeting of
St. Cloud’s board of trustees. He’d never quite understood what a board of
trustees was for, and his impatience with the routine inquiries was growing. In
the old days, there’d been the Maine State board of medical examiners; they’d
never asked him any questions—they never wanted to hear from him. Now it
appeared to Wilbur Larch that there was a board of trustees for everything.
This year there were two new board members who’d never before seen the
orphanage, and so the meeting had been scheduled to take place in St. Cloud’s
—the board usually met in Portland. The new members wanted to see the
place; the old members agreed they should refresh themselves with the
atmosphere.

air’s crispness than there were indications of the stifling carry-over of July’s
humidity and hazy heat; but Larch was irritable.

Angela. “Homer doesn’t say, ‘exactly.’ ”

the letter again and again.

“What do you do with your cars when you’re watching the movie?” Nurse

Edna asked.

“I don’t know,” Dr. Larch said. “I assume that if you drive into something to

see the movie, you must stay in your cars.”

“But what do you drive into, Wilbur?” Nurse Edna asked.
“That’s what I don’t know!” Larch shouted.
“Well, aren’t we in a lovely mood?” Nurse Angela said.
“Why would you want to bring your car to a movie in the first place?” Nurse

Edna asked.

“I don’t know the answer to that, either,” Dr. Larch said tiredly.
Unfortunately, he looked tired during the trustees meeting, too. Nurse

Angela tried to present some of the orphanage’s priorities for him; she didn’t
want him to get bad-tempered with anyone on the board. The two new
members seemed in an awful hurry to demonstrate that they already
understood everything—and Nurse Angela detected Dr. Larch looking at
these younger members with something of the look he had formerly reserved
for Clara, in the days when Larch would discover that Homer’s cadaver
hadn’t been put away properly.

raising; she was especially aggressive. She’d been married to a
Congregationalist missionary who’d committed suicide in Japan, and she had
returned to her home state of Maine with a zeal for putting her considerable
energies to work for something “doable.” Japan had not been at all “doable,”
she kept saying. Maine’s problems, by comparison, were entirely
surmountable. She believed that all Maine needed—or lacked—was
organization, and she believed every solution began with “new blood”—a
phrase, Nurse Angela observed, that caused Dr. Larch to pale as if his own
blood were trickling away from him.

work,” Dr. Larch snapped once, but the woman—Mrs. Goodhall—did not
look sufficiently bitten.

the duration of Dr. Larch’s “undertaking” and her respect for how much

experience Larch and his assistants had with administering St. Cloud’s;
perhaps they all could be invigorated by a younger assistant. “A young intern
—a willing toiler, and with some new ideas in the obstetrical field,” Mrs.
Goodhall suggested.

of babies born here.”

suggested. “Leave the medical practice to you—I’m talking about someone
with a grasp of some of the newer adoption procedures, or just someone who
could handle the correspondence and the interviewing for you.”

“I could use a new typewriter,” Dr. Larch said. “Just get me a new

typewriter, and you can keep the assistant—or give the assistant to someone
who’s really doddering around.”

The new man on the board was a psychiatrist; he was rather new at

psychiatry, which was rather new in Maine in 194_. His name was Gingrich;
even with people he had just met, he had a way of assuming he understood
what pressure they were under—he was quite sure that everyone was under
some pressure. Even if he was correct (about the particular pressure you were
under), and even if you agreed with him (that there indeed was a certain
pressure, and indeed you were under it), he had a way of assuming he knew
other pressures that preyed upon you (which were always unseen by you). For
example, had he seen the movie that began with the Bedouin on the camel,
Dr. Gingrich might have assumed that the captive woman was under great
pressure to marry someone—although it was clearly her opinion that all she
wanted was to get free. His eyes and introductory smile communicated a
cloying sympathy that you perhaps did not deserve—as if he were imparting
by the imposed gentleness of his voice and the slowness with which he spoke,
the assurance that everything is much more subtle than we can suppose.

intimidated by this new man who spoke in whispers and by this new woman
who was so loud. In tandem, they seemed so sure of themselves; they viewed
their new roles on the board not as learning experiences, or even as an
introduction to orphanage life, but as opportunities for taking charge.

Oh dear, Nurse Edna thought.
There’s going to be trouble, as if we need any, Nurse Angela thought. It

wouldn’t have hurt to have a young intern around, or an administrative
assistant, either; but she knew that Wilbur Larch was protecting his ability to
perform the abortions. How could he accept new appointees without knowing
the person’s beliefs?

think of you as doddering.”

suppose you might think so, too.”

your responsibilities should have all the help he can get.”

“Someone with my responsibility should stay responsible,” Larch said.
“With the pressure you must be under,” said Dr. Gingrich, “it’s no wonder

you find it hard to delegate even a little of that responsibility.”

but when he blinked his eyes he saw those bright stars that populated both a
clear Maine night and the firmament of ether, and he wasn’t sure which stars
they were. He rubbed his face with his hand, and caught Mrs. Goodhall
scribbling something on the impressively thick pad before her.

“Let’s see,” she said—sharply, by comparison to Dr. Gingrich’s wispy voice.

“You’re in your seventies, now—is that correct? Aren’t you seventy-
something?” she asked Dr. Larch.

“Right,” said Wilbur Larch. “Seventy-something.”
“And how old is Missus Grogan?” Mrs. Goodhall asked suddenly, as if Mrs.

Grogan weren’t present—or as if she were so old that she was incapable of
answering for herself.

chicken!”

“Oh, no one doubts you’re not lively!” said Dr. Gingrich.
“And Nurse Angela?” Mrs. Goodhall asked, not looking up at anyone; the

scrutiny of her own writing on the pad before her required every ounce of her
exhaustive attention.

“I’m fifty-eight,” Nurse Angela said.
“Angela is as strong as an ox!” Mrs. Grogan said.
“We don’t doubt it!” said Dr. Gingrich cheerfully.
“I’m fifty-five or fifty-six,” Nurse Edna offered, before the question was

raised.

“You don’t know how old you are?” Dr. Gingrich asked meaningfully.
“Actually,” said Wilbur Larch, “we’re all so senile, we can’t remember—

we’re just guessing. But look at you!” he said suddenly to Mrs. Goodhall,
which did get Mrs. Goodhall to raise her eyes from her pad. “I guess you have
such trouble remembering things,” Larch said, “that you have to write
everything down.”

said evenly.

to have the picture pretty clearly in mind.”

Larch. “It’s also clear how hard a job it is.” Such a warm washcloth kind of
sympathy was leaking from Dr. Gingrich that Larch felt wet—and grateful
that he wasn’t sitting near enough to Dr. Gingrich for Dr. Gingrich to touch
him; Gingrich was clearly a toucher.

“I’d not only like a new typewriter; I’d like permission to keep the old one.”

“I think we can arrange that,” Mrs. Goodhall said.
Nurse Edna, who was not accustomed to sudden insights—or, despite her

years, hot flashes—and was completely inexperienced with the world of
omens and signs or even forewarnings, felt a totally foreign and breathtaking
violence rise from her stomach. She found herself staring at Mrs. Goodhall
with a hatred Nurse Edna couldn’t conceive of feeling for another human
being. Oh dear, the enemy! she thought; she had to excuse herself—she was
sure she was going to be ill. (She was, but discreetly, out of sight, in the boys’
shower room.) Only David Copperfield, still mourning the departure of Curly
Day, and still struggling with the language, spotted her.

“Medna?” young Copperfield asked.
“I’m fine, David,” she told him, but she was not fine. I have seen the end,

she thought with an unfamiliar bitterness.

be long. He looked at his calendar; he had two abortions to perform the next
day, and three “probables” near the end of the week. There were always those
who just showed up, too.

And what if they get someone who won’t perform one? he thought.
When the new typewriter arrived, it fit—just in time—into his plans for

Fuzzy Stone.

“Thank you for the new typewriter,” Larch wrote to the board of trustees. It

had arrived “just in time,” he added, because the old typewriter (which, if
they remembered, he wanted to keep) had completely broken down. This was
not true. He had the keys replaced on the old typewriter, and it now typed a
story with a different face.

What it typed were letters from young Fuzzy Stone. Fuzzy began by

wanting Dr. Larch to know how much he was looking forward to being a
doctor when he grew up, and how much Dr. Larch had inspired him to make
this decision.

Fuzzy wrote to Dr. Larch. “Certainly, it is obstetrics that interests me, and
certainly your example is responsible for my interest, but I expect we shall

never agree about abortion. Although I know you perform abortions out of the
most genuine beliefs and out of the best intentions, you must permit me to
honor my beliefs accordingly.”

few convenient blanks. Larch completed Dr. F. Stone’s training (he put him
through medical school, he gave him fine obstetrical procedure—even a few
variances from Dr. Larch’s procedure, which Dr. Larch had Dr. Stone
describe). And always Fuzzy Stone remained faithful to his beliefs.

“I’m sorry, but I believe there is a soul, and that it exists from the moment of

conception,” Fuzzy Stone wrote. He was slightly pompous-sounding, as he
grew up, close to unctuous in his graciousness toward Larch, even capable of
condescension at times—the kind of patronizing a young man will indulge in
when he thinks he has “developed” beyond his teacher. Larch gave Fuzzy
Stone an unmistakable self-righteousness, which he imagined all supporters
of the existing law against abortion would feel at home with.

until you’re ready to retire, of course!”—and that by this replacement it might
be demonstrated to Dr. Larch that the law should be observed, that abortions
should not be performed, and that a safe and informative view of family
planning (birth control, and so forth) could in time achieve the desired effect
(“. . . without breaking the laws of God or man,” wrote a convincingly creepy
Fuzzy Stone).

“The desired effect”—both Dr. Larch and Dr. Stone agreed—would be a

minimum of unwanted children brought forth into the world. “I, for one, am
happy to be here!” crowed young Dr. Stone. He sounds like a missionary!
thought Wilbur Larch. The idea of making a missionary out of Fuzzy
appealed to Dr. Larch for several reasons—among them: Fuzzy wouldn’t need
a license to practice medicine if he took his magic to some remote and
primitive place.

was used for nothing else, and the new one for himself. (He made carbons of
his own letters and referred to his “dialogue” with young Dr. Stone in various
fragments, which he contributed to A Brief History of St. Cloud’s.)

refused to accept the idea that anyone should replace him who was unwilling
to perform abortions. “I will go until I drop,” he wrote to Fuzzy. “Here in St.
Cloud’s, I will never allow myself to be replaced by some reactionary
religious moron who cares more for the misgivings suffered in his own frail
soul than for the actual suffering of countless unwanted and mistreated
children. I am sorry you’re a doctor!” Larch ranted to poor Fuzzy. “I am sorry

such training was wasted on someone who refuses to help the living because
of a presumptuous point of view taken toward the unborn. You are not the
proper doctor for this orphanage, and over my dead body will you ever get my
job!”

Fuzzy said he needed to search his soul regarding his personal debt to Dr.
Larch and his “perhaps larger debt to society, and to all the murdered unborn
of the future”; it was hard, Fuzzy implied, to listen to his conscience and not
“turn in” Dr. Larch “. . . to the authorities,” he added ominously.

August of 194_. He wanted to leave the matter all set up—all arranged—
when Homer Wells returned to St. Cloud’s from his summer job.

Wilbur Larch had created a replacement for himself, one who would be

acceptable to the authorities—whoever they were. He had created someone
with qualified obstetrical procedure, and—what better?—an orphan familiar
with the place from birth. He had also created a perfect lie, because the Dr. F.
Stone whom Wilbur Larch had in mind would perform abortions, of course,
while at the same time—what better?—he would be on record for claiming he
was against performing them. When Larch retired (or, he knew, if he was ever
caught), he would already have available his most perfect replacement. Of
course, Larch was not through with Fuzzy; such an important replacement
might require some revision.

Wilbur Larch lay in the dispensary with both the stars of Maine and the stars

of ether circling around him. He had given Fuzzy Stone a role in life that was
much more strenuous than Fuzzy ever could have been capable of. How could
poor Fuzzy even have imagined it, as he succumbed to the failure of his
breathing contraption?

get Homer to play the part?

Homer Wells, gazing at the actual stars of Maine and at the orchards visible

in the waning moonlight out Wally’s window, saw something glint—
something beyond the orchard from which he knew the ocean could be
viewed. Homer moved his head up and down in Wally’s window, and the glint
flashed to him; the feeble signal reminded him of the night when the deep
Maine woods had not returned his voice to him—when he had yelled his
echoless good night to Fuzzy Stone.

Then he realized where the glint was coming from. There must be one,

small, polished spot on the tin roof of the cider house; he was seeing the
waning moon bounce off the roof of the cider house—off a spot no bigger
than a knife blade. This little glint in the night was one of those things that—

even after you identify it—you can’t leave alone.

It was no help to him, to listen to Wally’s peaceful breathing. The problem

is, Homer Wells knew, I am in love with Candy. It was Candy who suggested
he not go back to St. Cloud’s.

job on the boat, or in the pound.”

on in the orchards, especially through harvest. And she gets lonely whenever I
go back to college. I’ll bet she’d be delighted to have you stay right where
you are—in my room!”

Out in the orchards, the roof of the cider house flashed to him; the flash was

as small and as quick as the one glimpse of an eyetooth Grace Lynch had
revealed—her mouth had parted only that much when she’d last looked at
him.

asked himself, what can I do?

the wink of the curette before it went to work; he had seen it at rest in the
examining tray, dull with blood, in need of cleaning.

And if I go back to St. Cloud’s, he asked himself, what can I do?
In Nurse Angela’s office, on the new typewriter, Dr. Larch began a letter to

Homer Wells. “I remember nothing so vividly as kissing you,” Dr. Larch
began, but he stopped; he knew he couldn’t say that. He pulled the page from
the typewriter, then he hid it deep within A Brief History of St. Cloud’s, as if it
were another particle of history without an audience.

David Copperfield had a fever when he’d gone to bed, and Larch went to

check on the boy. Dr. Larch was relieved to feel that young Copperfield’s
fever had broken; the boy’s forehead was cool, and a slight sweat chilled the
boy’s neck, which Larch carefully rubbed dry with a towel. There was not
much moonlight; therefore, Larch felt unobserved. He bent over Copperfield
and kissed him, much in the manner that he remembered kissing Homer
Wells. Larch moved to the next bed and kissed Smoky Fields, who tasted
vaguely like hot dogs; yet the experience was soothing to Larch. How he
wished he had kissed Homer more, when he’d had the chance! He went from
bed to bed, kissing the boys; it occurred to him, he didn’t know all their
names, but he kissed them anyway. He kissed all of them.

about?” But no one else was awake, or else no one wanted to answer him.

I wish he would kiss me, thought Nurse Edna, who had a very alert ear for

unusual goings-on.

told her about it.

“I think it’s senile,” Nurse Angela said.
But Homer Wells, at Wally’s window, did not know that Dr. Larch’s kisses

were out in the world, in search of him.

He didn’t know, either—he could never have imagined it!—that Candy was

also awake, and also worried. If he does stay, if he doesn’t go back to St.
Cloud’s, she was thinking, what will I do? The sea tugged all around her. Both
the darkness and the moon were failing.

the cider house, but the roof did not wink to him, no matter how he moved his
head. With no signal flashing to him, Homer may have thought he was
speaking to the dead when he whispered, “Good night, Fuzzy.”

He did not know that Fuzzy Stone, like Melony, was looking for him.

Before the War

One day that August a hazy sun hung over the coastal road between York
Harbor and Ogunquit; it was not the staring sun of Marseilles, and not the
cool, crisp sun that blinks on much of the coast of Maine at that time of year.
It was a St. Cloud’s sunlight, steamy and flat, and Melony was irritated by it
and sweating when she accepted a ride in a milk truck that was heading
inland.

She knew she was south of Portland, and that there was relatively little of

the Maine coast that lay south of Portland, yet it had taken her these months
to search the apple orchards in this limited vicinity. She was not discouraged,
she knew she’d had some bad luck, and that her luck was due to improve.
She’d managed to pick the pockets of several citizens of Portland; this tided
her over for a while. She’d gotten in trouble with some Navy men whose
pockets she’d tried to pick in Kittery. She’d managed not to have sex with the
men, but they had broken her nose, which had healed crookedly, and they had
chipped her two front teeth—the big uppers. Not that she tended to smile a lot
anyway, but she had since adopted a rather closemouthed and tight-lipped
expression.

The first two orchards she’d visited were within view of the ocean, but they

were not called Ocean View, and no one in either orchard had heard of the
Ocean View Orchards. She then found an inland orchard, where someone told
her he had heard of an Ocean View, but that he was sure it was just a name:
that the place wasn’t anywhere near the coast. She took a job washing bottles
in a dairy in Biddeford, but she quit it as soon as she’d made some traveling
money.

The orchard between York Harbor and Ogunquit turned out to be called

York Farm, which looked as plain as its name, but Melony told the milk truck
driver to let her out there, anyway; it was, at least, an apple orchard; someone
might have heard of Ocean View.

would-be picker, trying to get work ahead of the migrants.

Gravensteins this month, and I don’t need help pickin’ them—there ain’t that
many.”

“You heard of an orchard called Ocean View?” Melony asked the foreman.
“You used to pick there?” the foreman asked.
“No. I’m just looking for it,” Melony said.
“It sounds like a rest home,” the foreman said, but when Melony didn’t even

smile, he stopped being friendly. “You any idea how many places there must
be in Maine called Ocean View?” he asked.

thought she wouldn’t mind staying; some of the other pickers might have
heard of the place where Homer Wells had gone.

“You got anything for me to do?” Melony asked the foreman.
“In three weeks—if you know how to pick,” he added.
“There can’t be much to picking apples,” Melony said.
“You think it’s easy?” the foreman asked. “Come here,” he said, and walked

her through the dingy apple mart; two older women were hand-lettering a
wooden price list. In the first orchard behind the apple mart, the foreman
proceeded to lecture Melony on the art of apple picking.

stem is the bud for next year’s apple. That’s the spur,” he said. “You pull the
spur, you pull two years in one.” He demonstrated to Melony how to twist the
apple. “Twist, don’t pull,” he told her.

Melony reached into the tree and twisted an apple free. She did it correctly;

she looked at the foreman and shrugged. She took a bite of the apple, which
wasn’t ripe; she spit out the bite and threw the apple away.

“That’s a Northern Spy,” the foreman explained. “We pick them last—

they’re not ready before October.”

Melony was bored. She started back toward the apple mart.
“I’ll give you ten cents a bushel!” the foreman called after her. “Only a

nickel a bushel for drops, or if you bruise the fruit! You look pretty strong!”
he said, following after her. “If you get the hang of it, you might pick ninety
bushels a day. I’ve had guys here doin’ a hundred bushels. That’s ten bucks a
day,” he said. “Come back in three weeks,” he added, stopping next to the
women working on the sign in the apple mart; Melony was already back on
the road.

“I’ll be somewhere else in three weeks,” she said to the foreman.
“Too bad,” the foreman said. He watched her walk down the road, headed

back toward the coast. “She looks strong,” he said to one of the women in the
mart. “I’ll bet she weighs about one-sixty.”

“She’s just a tramp,” the woman said.
About a mile away from the apple mart, Melony walked by an orchard

where two workers were picking Gravensteins. One of the men waved to her;
Melony started to wave back but thought better of it. She was not more than a
hundred yards past the men when she heard their pickup truck coming after
her. The truck pulled up next to her, off to the side of the road, and the driver
said to her, “You look like you lost your sweetheart. Good thing you found
me.” The man in the passenger side of the truck opened the door before the
truck stopped rolling.

“You better leave me alone, buster,” Melony said to the driver, but the other

man was already around the truck and coming closer. Melony hopped over the
road ditch and ran into the orchard. The man pursued her, whooping. The
driver killed the truck motor and joined the chase—he left his door open, he
was in such a hurry.

down one row between the trees, then up another. The first man to chase her
was gaining on her, but she noticed that the driver lagged farther and farther
behind; he was a big, slow man, and he was huffing and puffing after he’d
passed five or six trees. Melony was huffing and puffing herself, but she ran
with a certain, even strength, and although the first, smaller man was gaining
on her, she could hear him breathing harder and harder.

three hundred yards, she saw that the heavy driver had slowed to a determined
walk. “Get her, Charley!” he called to the faster man.

her breath fairly quickly, then she ran at Charley—she moved low to the
ground, a kind of animal whine in her throat, and the man called Charley did
not have time to stop and catch his breath before she flung herself upon him.
They fell together—when she felt her knee against his throat, she jounced on
him. He made a choking sound and rolled on his side. Melony jumped up to
her feet; she stamped twice on his face, and when Charley managed to turn
over, on all fours, she jumped up as high as she could and landed with both
feet in the small of his back. He was already unconscious when she pinned his
arms behind him and bit his ear; she felt her teeth meet. She let him go and
knelt beside him; she caught her breath again; then she spit on him. When she
stood up, she saw that the heavy man had managed only to cross the dirt road
into the second orchard.

“Charley! Get up!” he said, wheezing, but Charley didn’t move. Melony

rolled Charley over on his back and undid his belt. She tugged it roughly
through the loops until she had the belt off him. The big man, the driver, was
now only three or four apple trees away from her. She wound one end of the
belt twice around her wrist and fist; when she let her arm hang at her side, the
buckle end of the belt touched the top of her foot. The big man stopped, only
two trees away from her. “What’d you do to Charley?” he asked her, but
Melony started swinging the belt; she swung it around and around her head,
faster and faster. The square brass belt buckle began to whistle. Melony
advanced on the heavy driver, a man in his late forties or early fifties; his hair
was gray and thin, and he had quite a paunch thrust ahead of himself. He
stood his ground for a moment and watched Melony come nearer to him. The
belt was a broad strap of sweat-and-oil-stained leather; the brass buckle was
the size of a man’s palm; with its square edges, it hummed through the air like
the north wind—it made a sound like a scythe.

“Hey!” the fat man said.
“Hey what, buster?” Melony said. She suddenly lowered the belt and

cracked the buckle across one of the man’s shins, where it lifted up a flap of
blue jeans and skin that looked like a torn dollar bill. When the man bent over
to grab his legs, she swiped the belt buckle across the side of his face; he sat
down suddenly and put his hand to his cheek, where he discovered a gouge
the approximate length and thickness of a cigarette. He hadn’t the time to
contemplate this wound before the belt buckle smacked him squarely across
the bridge of his nose—the force of the blow, and his pain, temporarily
blinded him. He tried to cover his head with one arm while he groped for
Melony with the other, but she found it easy to hit him everywhere, and he
quickly drew up his knees to his chest and covered his face and head with
both arms. The buckle raked and nicked his spine for a while; then she
stopped using the buckle end on him—she just strapped him with the flat end
of the belt across the backs of his legs and his ass. It seemed she would never
stop.

“Are the keys in that truck, buster?” she asked him between blows.
“Yes!” he cried, but she hit him some more before she left him. She took the

belt with her, walking back through the first orchard, occasionally taking a
swipe at an apple with the tip of the belt, with which she had developed some
skill.

his eyes. “Is she gone, Charley?” the fat man asked after a while, because he
hadn’t moved or opened his eyes either.

“I hope so,” Charley said, but neither of the men moved until they heard

Melony start the truck.

job where she had learned to drive, but it was a passing thought. She turned
the truck around and drove back to the apple mart, where the foreman was
surprised to see her.

that two of his men had tried to rape her. One of the men, the fat one, was
married to the woman who was hand-lettering the sign. Melony said to the
foreman that he could fire those two men and give her their jobs. “I can do
whatever the two of them do, and better than they do it,” Melony said.

Or else, she said to the foreman, he could call the police and she’d tell the

police how she’d been attacked. The woman whose husband had assaulted
Melony was pale and silent, but the other woman said to the foreman what
she’d said earlier: “She’s just a tramp. What do you want to listen to her for?”

everything you do on your back. You look like you’re shit on your back,”
Melony said, and she flicked the flat end of the belt toward the woman, who
jumped away as if the belt were a snake.

“Hey, that’s Charley’s belt,” the foreman said.
“Right,” said Melony; this echo of Homer Wells nearly brought tears to her

eyes. “Charley lost it,” she added. She went to the truck and took out her
bundle—her few things, which were all wrapped in Mrs. Grogan’s coat. She
used the belt to cinch the coat and its contents more securely together.

“I can’t fire those guys,” the foreman told her. “They’ve worked here all

their lives.”

“So call the police, then,” Melony said.
“She’s threatening you,” the fat man’s wife said to the foreman.
“No shit,” Melony said.
The foreman got Melony settled comfortably in the cider house.
“You can stay here, at least until the pickin’ crew comes,” he said. “I don’t

know if you want to stay here when they’re here. Sometimes there’s women
with them, and sometimes there’s kids, but if it’s just men, I don’t think you
want to stay here. They’re Negroes.”

“It’ll do for now, anyway,” Melony said, looking around.
There were fewer beds than there were in the Worthingtons’ cider house, and

it was a lot less neat and clean. York Farm was a much smaller, poorer
orchard than Ocean View, and there was no one there who cared very much
about the style and shape of the quarters for the migrants; York Farm was
without an Olive Worthington. The vinegar smell was stronger in the York
Farm cider house, and behind the press were dried clots of pomace that clung
to the wall like apple scab. There was no stove in the kitchen section—just a

hot plate, which tended to blow the old fuses. There was one fuse box for the
pump and grinder and the low-watt, overhead bulbs; the light in the
refrigerator was out, but this at least made the mold less visible.

many wrecked rooms in both the abandoned and the lived-in buildings of St.
Cloud’s.

come you’re lookin’ for it?”

“I’m looking for my boyfriend,” Melony told him.
She has a boyfriend? the foreman wondered.
He went to see how the men were doing. The fat man, whose wife had

accompanied him to the hospital (although she had not spoken to him, and
wouldn’t for more than three months), sat rather placidly through his stitches,
but he grew quite excited when the foreman told him that he’d fixed Melony
up in the cider house and had given her a job—at least through the harvest.

“You gave her a job!” the fat man cried. “She’s a killer!”
“Then you better keep the fuck out of her way,” the foreman told him. “If

you get in her way I’ll have to fire you—she damn near made me, already.”

The fat man had a broken nose and needed a total of forty-one stitches,

thirty-seven in his face and four in his tongue where he had bitten himself.

The man called Charley was better off in the stitches department. He

required only four—to close the wound in his ear. But Melony had cracked
two of his ribs by jumping on him; he had received a concussion from having
his head stamped on; and his lower back would suffer such repeated muscle
spasms that he would be kept off a ladder through the harvest.

bitch who’s her boyfriend.”

“Just keep out of her way,” the foreman advised him.
“Has she still got my belt?” Charley asked the foreman.
“If you ask her for your belt back, I’ll have to fire you. Get yourself a new

belt,” the foreman said.

“You won’t see me askin’ her for nothin’,” Charley said. “She didn’t say her

boyfriend was coming here, did she?” he asked the foreman, but the foreman
said that if Melony was looking for her boyfriend, the boyfriend must not
have given her any directions; he must have left her. “And God help him if he
left her,” the foreman said—over and over again.

“If you had a woman like that, wouldn’t you try to leave her?”

“In the first place,” the foreman said, “I wouldn’t ever have a woman like

wouldn’t dare.”

In the cider house at York Farm—somewhere inland from York Harbor,

somewhere west of Ogunquit, with several hundred miles of coastline
between her and Homer Wells—Melony lay listening to the mice. Sometimes
they scurried, sometimes they gnawed. The first mouse bold enough to race
across the foot of her mattress was swatted so hard with the buckle end of
Charley’s belt that it flew across four beds, all in a row, and struck the wall
with a soft thud. Melony promptly retrieved it—it was quite dead, its back
broken. With the aid of a pencil without a point, Melony was able to prop the
dead mouse into a sitting position on her night table, an inverted apple crate,
which she then moved to the foot of her bed. It was her belief that the dead
mouse might function as a kind of totem, to warn other mice away, and—
indeed—no mouse bothered Melony for several hours. She lay in the weak
light reading Jane Eyre—the empty, dark orchard ripening all around her.

concludes: “Preconceived opinions, foregone determinations, are all I have at
this hour to stand by: there I plant my foot.”

on her back, her broad nostrils full of the sharp cider-vinegar air—the same
air Homer Wells is smelling, she thought. Just before she fell asleep, she
whispered—although there were only the mice to hear her—“Good night,
Sunshine.”

The next day it rained. It rained from Kennebunkport to Christmas Cove.
There was such a strong northeast wind that the flags on the boats moored at
the Haven Club, even though they were saturated with rain, pointed to shore,
and made a brisk snapping sound as constant as the chafe of Ray Kendall’s
lobster boat against the old worn-rubber tires that padded his dock.

Ray would spend the day under the John Deere in Building Number Two; he

was, alternately, replacing the tractor’s manifold and sleeping. It was the place
he slept best: under a large, familiar machine. He was never detected; his legs
at times extended from under the vehicle in a posture of such extreme sprawl
that he looked dead—run over or crushed. One of the apple workers, startled
to see him, would speak out, “Ray? Is that you?” Whereupon, like Dr. Larch
brought back from ether, Ray Kendall would wake up and say, “Right here.
I’m right here.”

“Some job, huh?” the worried party would inquire.
“Yup,” Ray would say. “Some job, all right.”
The rain came pelting down, the wind so strongly onshore that the gulls

moved inland. At York Farm they huddled against the cider house and woke

up Melony with their fretting; at Ocean View they squatted together on the tin
roof of the cider house, where a crew of scrubbers and painters were at work
again.

tank; she was kneeling inside the vat, and the sound of her movements in
there impressed the others with a kind of furtive energy as if an animal were
scrounging for a nest or for its dinner. Meany Hyde had left the cider house
on what his wife, Florence, called “another bullshit errand.” Meany had
determined that the fan belt on the conveyor was loose, and so he removed it
and said he was taking it to Ray Kendall to see what Ray could do about it.

“Order a new one, or take a piece out of that one—right?”

“I suppose,” Meany said warily.
“And what do you need the conveyor for today?” Florence asked.
“I’m just takin’ it to Ray!” Meany said peevishly.
“You don’t wanna work too much, do you?” Florence said, and Meany

shuffled out into the rain; he smiled and winked at Homer Wells as he was
climbing into the pickup.

“I got a lazy husband,” Florence said happily.
“That’s better than some other kinds,” said Irene Titcomb—and everyone

automatically looked in the direction of the thousand-gallon vat where Grace
Lynch was feverishly scrubbing.

and the window trim in the bedroom wing of the cider house. Homer Wells
and Big Dot Taft and Big Dot’s kid sister, Debra Pettigrew, were painting the
kitchen with broader, more carefree strokes.

“I ain’t your chaperone or nothin’. If you want to make out, just go right
ahead.”

was funny, he thought, how you have two or three dates with someone—and
just kiss them and touch them in a few odd places—and everyone starts
talking to you as if you’ve got doing it on your mind every minute. Homer’s
mind was much more on Grace Lynch in the vat than it was on Debra
Pettigrew, who stood right beside him painting the same wall. When Homer
encountered the light switch by the kitchen door, he asked Big Dot Taft if he
should just paint all around it or let Florence and Irene, with their smaller
brushes, trim it more neatly.

“Just paint right over it,” said Big Dot Taft. “We do this every year. We just

make it look new and fresh. We’re not tryin’ to win no neatness contest.”

the wall—the type itself was very faint, from long exposure to the sunlight
that came through the kitchen’s curtainless windows. It was some kind of list;
the bottom quarter of the page had been torn away; whatever it was, it was
incomplete. Homer pulled the tack out of the wall and would have crumpled
the paper and tossed it toward the trash barrel if the top line of type hadn’t
caught his attention.

CIDER HOUSE RULES

the top line said.

What rules? he wondered, reading down the page. The rules were numbered.

1. Please don’t operate the grinder or the press if you’ve been drinking.
2. Please don’t smoke in bed or use candles.
3. Please don’t go up on the roof if you’ve been drinking—especially at

night.

4. Please wash out the press cloths the same day or night they are used.
5. Please remove the rotary screen immediately after you’ve finished

pressing and hose it clean WHEN THE POMACE IS STILL WET ON IT!

6. Please don’t take bottles with you when you go up on the roof.
7. Please—even if you are very hot (or if you’ve been drinking)—don’t go

into the cold-storage room to sleep.

8. Please give your shopping list to the crew boss by seven o’clock in the

morning.

9. There should be no more than half a dozen people on the roof at any one

time.

If there were a few more rules, Homer couldn’t read them because the page

had been ripped off. Homer handed the torn paper to Big Dot Taft.

“What’s all this about the roof?” he asked Debra Pettigrew.
“You can see the ocean from the roof,” Debra said.
“That ain’t it,” said Big Dot Taft. “At night you can see the Ferris wheel and

the carnival lights in Cape Kenneth.”

“Big deal,” said Homer Wells.
“It’s no big deal to me, either,” Big Dot Taft said, “but those darkies really

like it.”

“They sit up on the roof all night, some nights,” Debra Pettigrew said.
“They get drunk up there and fall off, some nights,” Florence Hyde

announced from the bedroom wing.

“They break bottles up there and cut themselves all up,” said Irene Titcomb.
“Well, not every night, they don’t,” said Big Dot Taft.

he passed out in the cold storage and woke up with pneumonia,” Debra
Pettigrew said.

“You don’t exactly ‘wake up with’ pneumonia,” said Homer Wells. “It’s

more complicated than that.”

“Excuse me,” Debra said sulkily.
“Anyway, nobody pays no attention to them rules,” Big Dot Taft said.

“Every year Olive writes them up, and every year nobody pays no attention.”

Hyde. “If Olive didn’t go shoppin’ for them every day, they’d starve.”

“They never get themselves organized,” Irene Titcomb said.
“One of them got his whole arm caught in the grinder,” Big Dot Taft

recalled. “Not just his fool hand—his whole arm.”

“Yuck,” said Debra Pettigrew.
“Yuck is what his arm was, all right,” said Florence Hyde.
“How many stitches?” asked Homer Wells.
“You’re really curious, you know that?” Debra Pettigrew asked him.
“Well, they don’t do no harm, except to themselves,” said Irene Titcomb

philosophically. “What’s it matter if they want to drink too much and roll off
the roof? Wasn’t nobody ever killed here, was there?”

“Not yet,” said Grace Lynch’s tight, thin voice, her words strangely

amplified because she was speaking from the bottom of the thousand-gallon
vat. The combination of the strangeness of her voice and the rareness of her
making a contribution of any kind to their conversation made them all silent.

Everyone was just working away when Wally drove up in the green van

with Louise Tobey; he dropped Louise off with her own bucket and brush and
asked the rest of them if they needed anything—more brushes? more paint?

“Just give me a kiss, honey,” said Florence Hyde.
“Just take us to the movies,” said Big Dot Taft.
“Just propose to me, just propose!” cried Irene Titcomb. Everyone was

laughing when Wally left. It was almost lunchtime, and everyone knew that
Squeeze Louise had come to work particularly late. She usually arrived with
Herb Fowler, more or less on time. Louise looked especially pouty this
morning, and no one spoke to her for a while.

“Well, you can be havin’ your period, or somethin’, and still say good

mornin’,” said Big Dot Taft after a while.

“Good mornin’,” said Louise Tobey.
“La-de-da!” said Irene Titcomb. Debra Pettigrew bumped Homer in the side;

she just continued her scratching and hissing noises in the vat’s bottom. She
wouldn’t have accepted the invitation, anyway. Homer was thinking he
probably should accept it, to get away from Grace Lynch, but he had
promised himself to investigate the roof of the cider house—he wanted to find
the spot that had glinted to him so mysteriously in the moonlight; and now
that he’d heard about the cider house rules and that you could see the ocean—
and the Cape Kenneth Ferris wheel!—from the roof, he wanted to climb up
there. Even in the rain.

he’d gone with them, and then he told Herb Fowler out in the driveway that
he was going to stay. He felt a finger hook him in his blue jeans pocket, one
of the front ones, and when Herb and the others had gone, he looked in his
pocket and discovered the rubber. The prophylactic’s presence in his pocket
urged him up on the cider house roof in a hurry.

surprised him; he had not noticed them huddled on the slope of the roof that
faced away from him—and away from the wind. The roof was slippery in the
rain; he had to grip the corrugated grooves with both hands and place his feet
very close to each other as he climbed. The pitch of the roof was not too
steep, or he wouldn’t have been able to climb it at all. To his surprise, he
found a number of planks—old two-by-fours—nailed to the seaward side of
the roof’s apex. Benches! he thought. Even at an angle, they were at least
more comfortable to sit on than the tin. He sat there in the rain and tried to
imagine the pleasure of the view, but the weather was much too stormy for
him to be able to see the farthest orchards; the ocean was completely
obscured, and he had to imagine where, on a clear night, the Ferris wheel and
the carnival lights in Cape Kenneth would be.

He was getting soaked and was about to climb down when he saw the knife.

It was a big switchblade, the blade end stuck into the two-by-four at the top of
the roof alongside him; the handle, which was fake horn, was cracked in two
places, and when Homer Wells tried to extract the blade from the wood, the
handle broke in two in his hands. That was why it had been left there,
apparently. With the handle broken, the knife wouldn’t close properly; it
wasn’t safe to carry that way—and, besides, the blade was rusted. The whole
roof was rusted, Homer noticed; there was no single spot shiny enough to
have reflected the moonlight back to Wally’s window. Then he noticed the
broken glass; some larger pieces were caught in the corrugated grooves in the
tin. It must have been one of those pieces of glass that caught the moon,
Homer thought.

glass, he supposed. He tried to imagine the black men drinking at night on the
roof; but the rain had soaked him through, and the wind now thoroughly
chilled him. Inching his way back down the roof—to the edge where the
ground was the safest jump—he cut his hand, just a small cut, on a piece of
glass he didn’t see. By the time he went back inside the cider house, the cut
was bleeding freely—quite a lot of blood for such a small cut, he thought, and
he wondered if perhaps there was a tiny piece of glass still inside the cut.
Grace Lynch must have heard him rinsing the wound in the kitchen sink (if
she hadn’t heard him on the roof). To Homer’s surprise, Grace was still in the
thousand-gallon vat.

“Help me,” she called to him. “I can’t get out.”
It was a lie; she was just trying to draw him to the edge of the tank. But

orphans have a gullible nature; orphanage life is plain; by comparison, every
lie is sophisticated. Homer Wells, although he approached the rim of the cider
vat with trepidation, approached steadily. The quickness of her thin hands,
and the wiry strength with which they gripped his wrists, surprised him; he
nearly lost his balance—he was almost pulled into the tank, on top of her.
Grace Lynch had taken all her clothes off, but the extreme definition of her
bones struck Homer more powerfully than anything forbidden in her
nakedness. She looked like a starved animal contained in a more or less
humane trap; humane, except that it was evident, from her bruises, that her
captor beat her regularly and hard. The bruises on her hips and thighs were
the largest; the thumbprint bruises on the backs of her arms were the deepest
purple hue and there was a yellow-to-green bruise on one of her small breasts
that looked especially angry.

“Let me go,” said Homer Wells.
“I know what they do where you come from!” Grace Lynch cried, tugging

on his wrists.

“Right,” said Homer Wells. Systematically, he began to peel back her

fingers, but she scrambled nimbly up the side of the vat and bit him sharply
on the back of his hand. He had to push her, then, and he might have hurt her
if they both hadn’t heard the splashy arrival of Wally in the green van. Grace
Lynch let Homer go and scurried to put on her clothes. Wally sat in the van in
the drenching rain and pumped the horn; Homer ran outside to see what he
wanted.

some kind of trouble at Sanborn’s.”

For Homer Wells, who’d grown up in a world without fathers, it was a shock

was true. There was a peck bag of Gravensteins in the passenger seat of the
van; Homer held the apples in his lap as Wally drove down Drinkwater Road
to Sanborn’s General Store. The proprietors, Mildred and Bert Sanborn, were
among Senior’s oldest friends; he’d been a schoolboy with both of them and
had once dated Milly (before he’d met Olive—and before Milly had married
Bert).

plumber, was standing on the porch of the general store, not letting anyone
inside, when Wally and Homer drove into Heart’s Rock.

“It’s a good thing you’re here, Wally,” Warren said, when the boys ran up to

the porch. “Your Dad’s got some wild hair across his ass.”

the moment—cornered Senior in a niche of shelves reserved for baking
goods; Senior appeared to have littered the floor and much of himself with all
the flour and sugar within his reach. His trapped appearance reminded Homer
of Grace Lynch.

“What’s the trouble, Pop?” Wally asked his father. Mildred Sanborn gave a

sigh of relief to see Wally, but Bert wouldn’t take his eyes off Senior.

“Trouble Pop,” Senior said.
“He got in a rage when he couldn’t find the dog food,” Bert said to Wally,

without looking away from Senior; Bert thoroughly expected Senior to bolt,
at any moment, to another part of the store and destroy it.

“What did you want with dog food, Pop?” Wally asked his father.
“Dog food Pop,” Senior repeated.
“It’s like he don’t remember, Wally,” Bert Sanborn said.
“We told him he didn’t have a dog,” Mildred said.
“I remember doing it to you, Milly!” Senior shouted.
“There he goes again,” Bert said. “Senior, Senior,” he said gently. “We’re all

your friends here.”

“I have to feed Blinky,” Senior said.
“Blinky was his dog when he was a boy,” Milly Sanborn told Wally.
“If Blinky was still alive, Senior,” Bert Sanborn said, “he’d be older than we

are.”

“Older than we are,” Senior said.
“Let’s go home, Pop,” Wally said.
“Home Pop,” Senior said, but he let Homer and Wally lead him to the van.
“I tell you Wally, it’s not booze,” said Warren Titus, who opened the side

door of the van for them. “It’s not on his breath, not this time.”

“It’s something else, Wally,” Bert Sanborn said.
“Who are you?” Senior asked Homer.

“I’m Homer Wells, Mister Worthington,” Homer said.
“Mister Worthington,” Senior said.
When they’d driven for almost five minutes, in silence, Senior shouted,

“Everyone just shut up!”

When they got to Ocean View, Olive met the van in the driveway; she

ignored Senior and spoke to Wally. “I don’t know what he’s had this morning,
unless it’s vodka; it wasn’t on his breath when he left. I wouldn’t have let him
take the van if I thought he’d been drinking.”

Senior to the bedroom, got his shoes off, and coaxed him to lie down on the
bed.

“You know, I drilled Milly once,” Senior told his son.
“Sure you did, Pop,” said Wally.
“I drilled Milly! I drilled Milly!” Senior said.
Wally tried to humor Senior with a limerick; Senior had taught Wally a lot

of limericks, but Senior had difficulty remembering a limerick now, even if
Wally talked him through it, line by line.

“Remember the Duchess of Kent, Pop?” Wally asked his father.
“Sure,” Senior said, but he didn’t say anything more.
“Oh, pity the Duchess of Kent!” Wally began, but Senior just listened. “Her

cunt is so dreadfully bent,” Wally said.

“Bent?” Senior said.
Wally tried again, two lines at a time.

Oh, pity the Duchess of Kent!

Her cunt is so dreadfully bent . . .

“Dreadfully bent!” Senior sang out.

Oh, pity the Duchess of Kent!
Her cunt is so dreadfully bent,
The poor wench doth stammer,

“I need a sledgehammer

To pound a man into my vent.”

My God! thought Homer Wells. But Senior appeared to be baffled; he said

nothing. Wally and Homer left him when they thought he’d fallen asleep.

Downstairs, Homer Wells told Olive and Wally that he thought it was

something neurological.

“Neurological?” Olive said.
“What’s that mean?” Wally said.
They heard Senior cry out from upstairs. “Vent!” he shouted.

that Senior’s repetitions were insane. That habit was the first symptom he
described in his letter about Senior Worthington to Dr. Larch. “He repeats
everything,” he wrote to Dr. Larch. Homer also noted that Senior appeared to
forget the names of the most common things; he recalled how the man had
become stuck asking Wally for a cigarette—he had just kept pointing at
Wally’s breast pocket. “I think the word for cigarette had escaped him,” wrote
Homer Wells. Homer had also observed that Senior could not operate the
latch on the glove compartment the last time that Homer had driven him to
Sanborn’s for some simple shopping. And the man had the oddest habit of
picking at his clothes all the time. “It’s as if he thinks he’s got dirt, or hair, or
lint on his clothes,” wrote Homer Wells. “But there’s nothing there.”

older than Dr. Larch, was quite certain that Senior’s problems were entirely
“alcohol-related.”

“Doc Perkins is too old to be a doctor anymore, Mom,” Wally said.
“Doc Perkins delivered you—I guess he knows what he’s doing,” Olive

said.

“I bet I was easy to deliver,” Wally said cheerfully.
I’ll bet you were, imagined Homer Wells, who thought that Wally took

everything in the world for granted—not in a selfish or spoiled way, but like a
Prince of Maine, like a King of New England; Wally was just born to be in
charge.

Dr. Larch’s letter to Homer Wells was so impressive that Homer

immediately showed it to Mrs. Worthington.

organic brain syndrome,” Dr. Larch wrote. “In a man of this age, there aren’t
a lot of diagnoses to choose from. I’d say your best bet is Alzheimer’s
presenile dementia; it’s pretty rare; I looked it up in one of my bound volumes
of the New England Journal of Medicine.

“Picking imaginary lint off one’s clothes is what neurologists call

carphologia. In the progress of deterioration common to Alzheimer’s disease,
a patient will frequently echo back what is said to him. This is called
echolalia. The inability to name even familiar objects such as a cigarette is
due to a failure to recognize the objects. This is called anomia. And the loss
of the ability to do any type of skilled or learned movement such as opening
the glove compartment is also typical. It is called apraxia.

“You should prevail upon Mrs. Worthington to have her husband examined

by a neurologist. I know there is at least one in Maine. It’s only my guess that
it’s Alzheimer’s disease.”

“Alzheimer’s disease?” asked Olive Worthington.
“You mean it’s a disease—what’s wrong with him?” Wally asked Homer.
Wally cried in the car on the way to the neurologist. “I’m sorry, Pop,” he

said. But Senior seemed delighted.

was exuberant.

someone had announced that he was cured; what he had was quite incurable.
“I have a disease!” He was euphoric about it.

that he wasn’t simply a drunk. It was such an enormous relief to Olive that
she wept on Wally’s shoulder; she hugged and kissed Homer with an energy
Homer had not known since he left the arms of Nurse Angela and Nurse
Edna. Mrs. Worthington thanked Homer over and over again. It meant a great
deal to Olive (although she had long ago fallen out of love with Senior, if she
had ever truly loved him) to know that this new information permitted her to
renew her respect for Senior. She was overwhelmingly grateful to Homer and
to Dr. Larch for restoring Senior’s self-esteem—and for restoring some of her
esteem for Senior, too.

All this contributed to the special atmosphere that surrounded Senior’s death

at the end of the summer, shortly before the harvest; a sense of relief was far
more prevalent than was a sense of grief. That Senior Worthington was on his
way to death had been certain for some time; that, in the nick of time, he had
managed to die with some honor— “. . . of a bona fide disease!” Bert Sanborn
said—was a welcome surprise.

Of course, the residents of Heart’s Rock and Heart’s Haven had some

difficulty with the term—Alzheimer was not a name familiar to the coast of
Maine in 194_. The workers at Ocean View had particular trouble with it; Ray
Kendall, one day, made it easier for everyone to understand. “Senior got Al’s
Hammer disease,” he announced. Al’s Hammer! Now there was a disease
anyone could understand.

“I just hope it ain’t catchin’,” said Big Dot Taft.
“Maybe you got to be rich to get it?” wondered Meany Hyde.
“No, it’s neurological,” Homer Wells insisted, but that didn’t mean anything

to anyone except Homer.

And so the men and women at Ocean View developed a new saying as they

got ready for the harvest that year. “You better watch out,” Herb Fowler
would say, “or you’ll get Al’s Hammer.”

And when Louise Tobey would show up late, Florence Hyde (or Irene

Titcomb, or Big Dot Taft) would ask her, “What’s the matter, you got your

period or Al’s Hammer?” And when Grace Lynch would show up with a
limp, or with a noticeable bruise, everyone would think but never say out
loud, “She caught old Al’s Hammer last night, for sure.”

—you obviously have an instinct for it.”

“Doctor Larch is the doctor,” said Homer Wells. “I’m the Bedouin.”

Just before the harvest—when Olive Worthington had put fresh flowers in the
bedroom wing of the cider house and had typed a clean page of rules (almost
exactly the same rules from the previous years) and had tacked them next to
the light switch by the kitchen door—she offered the Bedouin a home.

“I always hate it when Wally goes back to college,” Olive told Homer. “And

this year, with Senior gone, I’m going to hate it more. I would like it very
much if you thought you could be happy here, Homer—you could stay in
Wally’s room. I like having someone in the house at night, and someone to
talk to in the morning.” Olive was keeping her back to Homer while she
looked out the bay window in the Worthingtons’ kitchen. The rubber raft that
Senior used to ride was bobbing in the water within her view, but Homer
couldn’t be sure if Olive was looking at the raft.

“I’m not sure how Doctor Larch would feel about it,” Homer said.
“Doctor Larch would like you to go to college one day,” Olive said. “And so

would I. I would be happy to inquire, at the high school in Cape Kenneth, if
they’d work with you—if they’d try to evaluate what you know and what you
need to learn. You’ve had a very . . . odd education. I know that Doctor Larch
is interested in having you take all the sciences.” (Homer understood that her
mind must have been recalling this from a letter from Dr. Larch.) “And
Latin,” said Olive Worthington.

“Latin,” said Homer Wells. This was surely Dr. Larch’s work. Cutaneus

maximus, thought Homer Wells, dura mater, not to mention good old
umbilicus. “Doctor Larch wants me to be a doctor,” Homer said to Mrs.
Worthington. “But I don’t want to be.”

“I think he wants you to have the option of becoming a doctor, should you

change your mind,” Olive said. “I think he said Latin or Greek.”

They must have had quite some correspondence, thought Homer Wells, but

all he said was, “I really like working on the farm.”

“Well, I certainly want you to keep working here,” Olive told him. “I need

your help—through the harvest, especially. I don’t imagine you’d be a full-
time student; I have to talk to the high school, but I’m sure they’d view you as
something of an experiment.”

“An experiment,” said Homer Wells. Wasn’t everything an experiment for a

Bedouin?

it there because he was supposed to find it? And the broken glass, a piece of
which had signaled to him in his insomnia at Wally’s window: was the glass
on the roof in order to provide him with some message?

“I’ll take biology,” Homer Wells wrote, “and anything scientific. But do I
have to take Latin? Nobody even speaks it anymore.”

Where did he get to be such a know-it-all? wondered Wilbur Larch, who

nevertheless saw certain advantages to Homer Wells not knowing Latin or
Greek, both the root of so many medical terms. Like coarctation of the aorta,
Dr. Larch was thinking. It can be a relatively mild form of a congenital heart
disorder that could decrease as the patient grew older; by the time the patient
was Homer’s age, the patient might have no murmur at all and only a trained
eye could detect, in an X ray, the slight enlargement of the aorta. In a mild
case, the only symptoms might be a hypertension in the upper extremities. So
don’t learn Latin if you don’t want to, thought Wilbur Larch.

As for the best congenital heart defect for Homer Wells, Dr. Larch was

leaning toward pulmonary valve stenosis. “From infancy, and throughout his
early childhood, Homer Wells had a loud heart murmur,” Dr. Larch wrote—
for the record, just to hear how it sounded. “At twenty-one,” he noted
elsewhere, “Homer’s old heart murmur is difficult to detect; however, I find
that the stenosis of the pulmonary valve is still apparent in an X ray.” It might
be barely detectable, he knew; Homer’s heart defect was not for everyone to
see—that was the point. What was necessary was that it just be there.

Wells. “It’s a free country, isn’t it?”

Homer Wells was beginning to wonder. In the same envelope with Dr.

Larch’s letter was a letter Dr. Larch had forwarded to him from good old
Snowy Meadows. In Wilbur Larch’s opinion, Snowy was a fool, “but a
persistent one.”

“Hi, Homer, it’s me—Snowy,” Snowy Meadows began. He explained that

his name was now Robert Marsh—“of the Bangor Marshes, we’re the big
furniture family,” Snowy wrote.

The furniture family? thought Homer Wells.
Snowy went on and on about how he’d met and married the girl of his

dreams, and how he’d chosen the furniture business over going to college,
and how happy he was that he’d gotten out of St. Cloud’s; Snowy added that
he hoped Homer had “gotten out,” too.

“And what do you hear from Fuzzy Stone?” Snowy Meadows wanted to

know. “Old Larch says Fuzzy is doing well. I’d like to write Fuzzy, if you
know his address.”

mean (that “Fuzzy is doing well”)? Doing well at what? wondered Homer
Wells, but he wrote to Snowy Meadows that Fuzzy was, indeed, doing well;
that he had misplaced Fuzzy’s address for the moment; and that he found
apple farming to be healthy and satisfying work. Homer added that he had no
immediate plans to visit Bangor; he would surely look up “the furniture
Marshes” if he was ever in town. And, no, he concluded, he didn’t agree with
Snowy that “a kind of reunion in St. Cloud’s” was such a hot idea; he said he
was sure that Dr. Larch would never approve of such a plan; he confessed that
he did miss Nurse Angela and Nurse Edna, and of course Dr. Larch himself,
but wasn’t the place better left behind? “Isn’t that what it’s for?” Homer Wells
asked Snowy Meadows. “Isn’t an orphanage supposed to be left behind?”

Then Homer wrote to Dr. Larch.
“What’s this about Fuzzy Stone ‘doing well’—doing well at WHAT? I know

that Snowy Meadows is an idiot, but if you’re going to tell him some stuff
about Fuzzy Stone, don’t you think you better tell me, too?”

In time, in time, thought Wilbur Larch wearily; he was feeling harassed. Dr.

Gingrich and Mrs. Goodhall had prevailed upon the board of trustees; the
board had requested that Larch comply with Dr. Gingrich’s recommendation
of a “follow-up report” on the status of each orphan’s success (or failure) in
each foster home. If this added paperwork was too tedious for Dr. Larch, the
board recommended that Larch take Mrs. Goodhall’s suggestion and accept
an administrative assistant. Don’t I have enough history to attend to, as is?
Larch wondered. He rested in the dispensary; he sniffed a little ether and
composed himself. Gingrich and Goodhall, he said to himself. Ginghall and
Goodrich, he muttered. Richhall and Ginggood! Goodging and Hallrich! He
woke himself, giggling.

hall outside the dispensary.

“Goodballs and Ding Dong!” Wilbur Larch said to her.
He went to Nurse Angela’s office, with a vengeance. He had plans for Fuzzy

Stone. He called Bowdoin College (where Fuzzy Stone would successfully
complete his undergraduate studies) and Harvard Medical School (where
Larch intended Fuzzy to do very, very well). He told the registrar’s office at
Bowdoin that a sum of money had been donated to the orphanage at St.
Cloud’s for the express purpose of paying the medical school expenses of an
exceptional young man or woman who would be willing—more than willing,
even dedicated—to serve St. Cloud’s. Could Dr. Larch have access to the

transcripts of Bowdoin’s recent graduates who had gone on to medical
school? He told a slightly different story to Harvard Medical School; he
wanted access to transcripts, of course, but in this case the sum of money had
been donated to establish a training fellowship in obstetrics.

Clara, the first time he’d slept in a place other than the dispensary since World
War I; but he needed to familiarize himself with the transcript forms at
Bowdoin and at Harvard Medical School. Only in this way could he create a
transcript for F. Stone; he begged the use of a typewriter and some paper
—“one of your blank transcript forms will make it easier for me”—and
pretended to type out the names and credentials of a few interesting
candidates. “I see so many who’d be perfect,” he told them at Bowdoin and
Harvard, “but it’s impossible to know if any of them could tolerate Saint
Cloud’s. We’re very isolated,” he confessed, thanking them for their help,
handing them back their transcripts (Fuzzy’s in the proper place, among the
S’s).

When he had returned to St. Cloud’s, Dr. Larch wrote to Bowdoin and

Harvard, requesting copies of the transcripts of a few outstanding graduates;
he had narrowed the choices down to these few, he told them. A copy of
Fuzzy’s transcript came in the mail with the others.

post office box in Fuzzy’s name. Now he wrote to the postmaster there,
requesting the mail for F. Stone be forwarded to St. Cloud’s. The P.O. box
address would be useful, too, if young Dr. Stone were to pursue his zealous
instincts to a mission abroad. Then he sent an empty envelope to the
Cambridge address and waited for its return.

When the letter came back to him—when he was sure the system worked—

he composed the rest of the history regarding F. Stone and his adoptive family
(named Eames) and sent it along to the board of trustees, together with
Fuzzy’s address. He did not have to invent anything regarding Curly Day; he
cringed to write the name Roy Rinfret; and he told the truth regarding Snowy
Meadows and most of the others, although he had difficulty typing “the
furniture Marshes” without laughing out loud, and when he came to the case
of Homer Wells, he thought very carefully about how to word the matter of
Homer’s heart.

Among the members of the board, there wasn’t a heart specialist or a

radiologist, or even a surgeon; there was a very old GP who, Dr. Larch felt
sure, never read anything at all. Larch didn’t count Dr. Gingrich as a doctor;
he counted psychiatrists as nothing at all, and he felt confident that he could
bully Mrs. Goodhall with the slightest terminology.

He confessed to the board (isn’t everyone flattered by a confidence?) that he

had refrained from mentioning the matter of Homer’s heart to Homer; he
admitted to stalling but argued that worrying the boy might contribute to his
problem, and he wanted the boy to gain confidence in the outside world
before burdening him with this dangerous knowledge—yet he intended to
burden Homer with it, shortly. Larch said he had informed the Worthingtons
of the heart defect; they might therefore be more than usually protective of
Homer; he had not bothered to explain the presence of the actual murmur to
them, or to detail the exact characteristics of pulmonary valve stenosis. He
would be happy to provide the board with such details, should they request
them. He had fun imagining Mrs. Goodhall scrutinizing an X ray.

had been a good idea and that he had enjoyed himself immensely in preparing
them; contrary to needing an administrative assistant to perform such a
service, Dr. Larch said he had felt “positively energized” by the “welcome
task”—since, he added, following up on his orphans’ adoptive lives was
always on his mind. And sometimes right off the top of my head, he thought.

He was exhausted, and forgot to circumcise a newborn baby boy whom

Nurse Angela had prepared for the operation. He mistook a woman awaiting
an abortion for a woman he’d delivered the previous day, and therefore told
her that her baby was very healthy and doing fine. He spilled a small amount
of ether on his face and needed to irrigate his eye.

He became cross because he had overdosed prophylactics—he had far too

many rubbers around. Since Melony had left, no one was stealing the rubbers
anymore. When he thought of Melony, he became worried, which also made
him cross.

concerning David Copperfield’s lisp; he neglected to mention that David
Copperfield had been delivered and named by Homer Wells. He wrote a
slightly fictitious report on the orphan called Steerforth, remarking that his
delivery was so straightforward that Nurse Edna and Nurse Angela had been
able to handle it entirely without a doctor’s assistance. He wrote the truth
about Smoky Fields: the boy hoarded food, a trait that was more common in
the girls’ division than in the boys’, and Smoky was beginning to exhibit a
pattern of insomnia that Larch had not witnessed at St. Cloud’s “since the
days of Homer Wells.”

The memory of those days brought instant tears to his eyes, but he recovered

himself sufficiently to write that both he and Mrs. Grogan were worried about
Mary Agnes Cork: she had exhibited frequent depressions since Melony’s
departure. He also told the truth about Melony, although he chose not to

include any acts of vandalism. Larch wrote of Mary Agnes: “Perhaps she sees
herself as inheriting Melony’s former position, but she hasn’t the dominating
character that usually attends any powerful or leadership role.” That idiot Dr.
Gingrich is going to like that, Larch imagined. “Role,” Larch said aloud,
scornfully. As if orphans have the luxury of imagining that they have roles.

to use these things up in some way, he thought. He used a laundry-marking
pen to write the name GINGRICH on one prophylactic and the name
GOODHALL on the other. Then he took these jolly balloons and went in
search of Nurse Angela and Nurse Edna.

Larch found them.

making an appearance in the girls’ division except for the evening dose of
Jane Eyre—and even more unused to see him waving marked prophylactics in
their faces.

everyone. Whereupon he took a scalpel and popped the prophylactics. On the
floor above them, Mary Agnes Cork heard the noise and sat up in her bed
where she had been lying in a sullen depression. Mrs. Grogan was too stunned
to speak.

Nurse Edna was the first to say something. “Wilbur works so hard,” she said
cautiously. “Isn’t it a wonder that he can find the time to be playful?”

Mrs. Grogan was still struck speechless, but Nurse Angela said, “I think the

old man is losing his marbles.”

Nurse Edna appeared to be personally wounded by this remark; she returned

her teacup to her saucer very steadily before she spoke. “I think it’s the ether,”
she said quietly.

“Yes and no,” said Nurse Angela.
“Do you think it’s Homer Wells, too?” Mrs. Grogan asked.
“Yes,” Nurse Angela said. “It’s ether and it’s Homer Wells, and it’s old age,

and it’s those new members on the board. It’s just everything. It’s Saint
Cloud’s.”

tears when she said Melony’s name. Upstairs, Mary Agnes Cork heard
Melony’s name and cried.

where is the young man or the young woman who’s going to take care of us
all?

and clasped her hands; by pressing the heels of her hands together at a certain
angle, she could revive a little of the pain from her old collarbone injury. “Oh
Lord,” Mrs. Grogan prayed, “support us all day long, until the shadows
lengthen and the evening comes, and the busy world is hushed, and the fever
of life is over, and our work is done.”

whispered “Amen” to herself while she listened to Dr. Larch making his
rounds, kissing each of the boys—even Smoky Fields, who hoarded his food
and hid it in his bed, which smelled, and who only pretended to be asleep.

On the Ferris wheel, high above the carnival grounds and the beach at Cape
Kenneth, Homer Wells was trying to spot the roof of the cider house, but it
was dark and there were no lights on in the cider house—and even if the cider
house had been lit, or there had been the clearest daylight imaginable, the
house was too far away. Only the brightest carnival lights, especially the
distinctive lights of the Ferris wheel, were visible from the cider house roof;
the visibility didn’t exist the other way around.

“I want to be a pilot,” Wally said. “I want to fly, I really do. If I had my

pilot’s license, and my own plane, I could do all the spraying at the orchards
—I’d get a crop duster, but I’d paint it like a fighter. It’s so clumsy, driving
those dumb sprayers around behind those dumb tractors, up and down those
dumb hills.”

It was what Candy’s father, Ray, was doing at the moment; Meany Hyde

was sick, and Everett Taft, the foreman, had asked Ray if he’d mind driving a
night spray—Ray knew the equipment so well. It was the last spray before
harvest, and somewhere in the blackened inland greenery that lay below the
Ferris wheel, Raymond Kendall and Vernon Lynch were spraying their way
through Ocean View.

Sometimes Wally sprayed; Homer was learning how. And sometimes Herb

Fowler sprayed, but Herb protested against night spraying. (“I have better
things to do at night,” he’d say.) It was better to spray at night because the
wind dropped in the evenings, especially along the coast.

Wally wasn’t spraying tonight because it was his last night home; he was

going back to college in the morning.

“You’ll look after Candy for me, won’t you, Homer?” Wally asked, as they

loomed above the rocky coast and Cape Kenneth’s crowded beach; the scarce
bonfires from the summer’s-end beach parties winked; the wheel descended.

get home most weekends, but Wally would stay in Orono except for
Thanksgiving and Christmas and the longer vacations.

“Right,” said Homer Wells.
“If I were flying—in the war,” Wally said. “If I joined, and if I flew, I mean,

if I were in a bomber, I’d rather be in the B-24 than the B-25. I’d rather be
strategic than tactical, bomb things not people. And I wouldn’t want to fly a
fighter in the war. That’s shooting people, too.”

Homer Wells didn’t know what Wally was talking about; Homer didn’t

follow the war—he didn’t know the news. A B-24 was a four-engine, heavy
bomber that was used for strategic bombing—bridges, oil refineries, fuel
depots, railroad tracks. It hit industry, it didn’t drop its bombs on armies. That
was the work of the B-25—a medium, tactical bomber. Wally had studied the
war—with more interest than he pursued his botany (or his other courses) at
the University of Maine. But the war, which was called—in Maine, in those
days—“the war in Europe,” was very far from Homer’s mind. People with
families are the people who worry about wars.

Do Bedouins have wars? wondered Homer Wells. And if they do, do they

much care?

migrants, about seeing the Negroes. He didn’t know why. Were they like
orphans? Did they not quite belong? Were they not quite of sufficient use?

kind of bold resolve that his sense of elevation, on the Ferris wheel, enhanced.
And this evening there was a plan; Homer Wells—an orphan attached to
routine—liked for every evening to have a plan, even if he was not that
excited about this one.

Candy was waiting. He left Candy and Wally there. Ray would be out
spraying for several hours, and Candy and Wally wanted a private good-bye
together before Ray came home. Homer would go pick up Debra Pettigrew
and take her to the drive-in in Cape Kenneth; it would be their first drive-in
without Candy and Wally, and Homer wondered if the touch-this-but-not-that
rules would vary when he and Debra were alone. As he navigated an exact
path through the Pettigrews’ violent dogs, he was disappointed in himself that
he wasn’t dying to find out whether Debra would or wouldn’t. A particularly
athletic dog snapped very loudly, near his face, but the chain around the dog’s
neck appeared to strangle the beast in midair; it landed solidly on its rib cage,
with a sharp groan, and was slow getting to its feet. Why do people want to
keep dogs? Homer wondered.

crossing the country in a wagon train was an exercise in lunacy and sorrow; at
the very least, he thought, one should make some arrangements with the
Indians before starting out. The film was void of arrangements, and Homer
was unable to arrange for the use of Herb Fowler’s rubbers, which he kept in
his pocket—“in case.” Debra Pettigrew was substantially freer than she had
ever been before, but her ultimate restraint was no less firm.

“No!” she yelled once.
“There’s no need to shout,” said Homer Wells, removing his hand from the

forbidden place.

out—a mathematical certainty (and other certainties) apparent in her voice. In
Maine, in 194_, Homer Wells was forced to accept that what they called
“necking” was permitted; what they called “making out” was within the rules;
but that what he had done with Melony—what Grace Lynch appeared to be
offering him, and what Candy and Wally did (or had done, at least once)—to
all of that, the answer was “No!”

But how did Candy ever get pregnant? Homer Wells wondered, with Debra

Pettigrew’s damp little face pressed to his chest. Her hair tickled his nose, but
he could just manage to see over her—he could witness the Indian massacre.
With Herb Fowler dispensing prophylactics even faster than Dr. Larch passed
them out to the women at St. Cloud’s, how could Wally have let her get
pregnant? Wally was so provided for; Homer Wells couldn’t understand why
Wally was even interested in war. But would an orphan ever worry that he
was spoiled, or untested? Is an orphan ever bored, or restless—or are those
luxurious states of mind? He remembered that Curly Day had been bored.

“Are you asleep, Homer?” Debra Pettigrew asked him.
“No,” he said, “I was just thinking.”
“Thinking what?” Debra asked.
“How come Wally and Candy do it, and we don’t?” Homer asked her.
Debra Pettigrew appeared to be wary of the question, or at least she was

surprised by its bluntness; she was cautious in composing an answer.

“Well,” she began philosophically. “They’re in love—Wally and Candy.

Aren’t they?”

“Right,” said Homer Wells.
“Well, you never said you were in love—with me,” Debra added. “And I

never said I was—with you.”

“That’s right,” Homer said. “So it’s against the rules to do it if you aren’t in

love?”

“Look at it this way,” said Debra Pettigrew; she bit her lower lip. It was

absolutely as hard as she had ever thought. “If you’re in love and there’s an
accident—if somebody gets pregnant, is what I mean; then if you’re in love,
you get married. Wally and Candy are in love, and if they have an accident,
they’ll get married.”

see.” What he thought was, So those are the rules! It’s about accidents, it’s
about getting pregnant and not wanting to have a baby. My God, is everything
about that?

Pettigrew. If the argument was that an accidental pregnancy was really the
only reason for not doing it, what did she think of the alternative that Herb
Fowler so repeatedly presented? But by arguing in this fashion, wouldn’t he
be suggesting that all intimacy could be crudely accounted for—or was crude
itself? Or was intimacy crude only for him?

unfathomable to Homer Wells, the Indians carried on and on about the spear
as if such a spear were a treasure. Suddenly a cavalry officer had his hand
pinned to a tree by an arrow; the man went to great lengths (using his teeth
and his other hand) to free the arrow from the tree, but the arrow still stuck
very prominently through his hand. An Indian with a tomahawk approached
the cavalry officer; it looked like the end of him, especially since he insisted
on trying to cock his pistol with the thumb of the hand that had the arrow
stuck through it.

worked; the pistol—finally—was cocked. Homer Wells concluded from this
demonstration that the arrow had managed to pass through the hand without
damaging the branch of the median nerve that goes to the muscles of the
thumb. Lucky man, thought Homer Wells, as the cavalry officer shot the
approaching Indian in the heart—it must be the heart, thought Homer Wells,
because the Indian died instantly. It was funny how he could see the pictures
of the hand in Gray’s Anatomy more clearly than he could see the movie.

He took Debra home, begging her forgiveness for not offering to walk her to

her door; one of the dogs was loose, it had broken its chain, and it pawed
furiously at the driver’s-side window (which Homer had rolled up, just in
time). It breathed and slobbered and clicked its teeth against the glass, which
became so fogged and smeared that Homer had difficulty seeing when he
turned the Cadillac around.

“Cut it out, Eddy!” Debra Pettigrew was screaming at the dog as Homer

drove away. “Would you just cut it out, Eddy, please!” But the dog chased the
Cadillac for nearly a mile.

once? He thought so; but it must have been someone who was adopted
quickly—the way it was supposed to be done.

By the time he got to Kendall’s Lobster Pound, Ray was home. He was

making tea and warming his deeply lined, cracked hands on the pot—under
his ragged nails was the mechanic’s permanent, oil-black grime.

and have some tea with me.” Homer could see that Candy and Wally were out
on the dock, huddled together. “Lovebirds don’t feel the cold, I guess,” Ray
said to Homer. “It don’t look like they’re finished saying good-bye.”

knew Ray liked him.

“What’d you learn today?” Ray asked him. Homer was going to say

something about the drive-in rules but he guessed that wasn’t what Ray
meant.

“Nothing,” said Homer Wells.
“No, I’ll bet you learned somethin’,” Ray said. “You’re a learner. I know,

because I was one. Once you see how somethin’ is done, you know how to do
it yourself; that’s all I mean.” Ray had taught Homer oil changes and
lubrications, plugs and points and engine timing, fuel-line maintenance and
front-end alignment; he’d shown the boy how to tighten a clutch, and—to
Ray’s astonishment—Homer had remembered. He’d also shown him a valve
job and how to replace the universal. In one summer Homer Wells had
learned more about mechanics than Wally knew. But it wasn’t just Homer’s
manual dexterity that Ray was fond of; Ray respected loneliness, and an
orphan, he imagined, had a fair share of that.

“Shoot,” said Ray, “I’ll bet there’s nothing’ you couldn’t learn—nothin’ your

hands wouldn’t remember, if your hands ever got to hold it, whatever it was.”

“Right,” said Homer Wells, smiling. He remembered the perfect balance in

the set of dilators with the Douglass points; how you could hold one steadily
between your thumb and index finger just by resting the shaft against the pad
of your middle finger. It would move only and exactly when and where you
moved it. And how wonderfully precise it was, Homer thought: that the
vaginal speculum comes in more than one size; that there was always a size
that was just right. And how sensitive an adjustment could be accomplished
by just a half turn of the little thumbscrew, how the duck-billed speculum
could hold the lips of the vagina open exactly wide enough.

Homer Wells, twenty-one, breathing in the steam from the hot tea, sat

waiting for his life to begin.

In the Cadillac with Wally, driving back to Ocean View—the rock-and-water
prettiness of Heart’s Haven giving way to the scruffier, more tangled land of
Heart’s Rock—Homer said, “I was wondering—but don’t tell me if you’d
rather not talk about it—I was just wondering how it happened that Candy got
pregnant. I mean, weren’t you using anything?”

had a hole in it.”

“It had a hole in it?” said Homer Wells.
“Not a big one,” Wally said, “but I could tell it had a hole—you know, it

leaked.”

“Any hole is big enough,” Homer said.
“Sure is,” Wally said. “The way he carries the things around with him, it

probably got poked by something in his pocket.”

“I guess you don’t use the rubbers Herb throws at you anymore,” said

Homer Wells.

“That’s right,” Wally said.
When Wally was asleep—as peacefully as a prince, as out-to-the-world as a

king—Homer Wells slipped out of bed, found his pants, found the rubbers in
the pocket, and took one to the bathroom where he filled it up with water
from the cold water tap. The hole was tiny but precise—a fine but
uninterrupted needle of water streamed out of the end of the rubber. The hole
was bigger than a pinprick but not nearly so large as a nail would make;
maybe Herb Fowler used a thumbtack, or the point of a compass, thought
Homer Wells.

It was a deliberate sort of hole, perfectly placed, dead center. The thought of

Herb Fowler making the holes made Homer Wells shiver. He remembered the
first fetus he’d seen, on his way back from the incinerator—how it appeared
to have fallen from the sky. He recalled the extended arms of the murdered
fetus from Three Mile Falls. And the bruise that was green-going-to-yellow
on Grace Lynch’s breast. Had Grace’s journey to St. Cloud’s originated with
one of Herb Fowler’s prophylactics?

and depression, and destructiveness. He was familiar with mean-spiritedness
and with injustice, too. But this is evil, isn’t it? wondered Homer Wells. Have
I seen evil before? He thought of the woman with the pony’s penis in her
mouth. What do you do when you recognize evil? he wondered.

saw the eroded, still unplanted hillside behind the hospital and the boys’
division at St. Cloud’s; he saw the thick but damaged, sound-absorbing forest
beyond the river that carried away his grief for Fuzzy Stone. If he had known

Mrs. Grogan’s prayer, he would have tried it, but the prayer that Homer used
to calm himself was the end of Chapter 43 of David Copperfield. There being
twenty more chapters to go, these words were perhaps too uncertain for a
prayer, and Homer spoke them to himself uncertainly—not as if he believed
the words were true, but as if he were trying to force them to be true; by
repeating and repeating the words he might make the words true for him, for
Homer Wells:

I have stood aside to see the phantoms of those days go by me. They are
gone, and I resume the journey of my story.

But all that night he lay awake because the phantoms of those days were not

gone. Like the tiny, terrible holes in the prophylactics, the phantoms of those
days were not easy to detect—and their meaning was unknown—but they
were there.

In the morning Wally left, halfheartedly, for the university in Orono. The

next day, Candy left for Camden Academy. The day before the picking crew
arrived at Ocean View, Homer Wells—the tallest and oldest boy at Cape
Kenneth High School—attended the first class meeting of Senior Biology. His
friend Debra Pettigrew had to lead him to the laboratory; Homer got lost en
route and wandered into a class called Wood Shop.

The textbook for Senior Biology was B. A. Bensley’s Practical Anatomy of

the Rabbit; the text and illustrations were intimidating to the other students,
but the book filled Homer Wells with longing. It was a shock for him to
realize how much he missed Dr. Larch’s well-worn copy of Gray’s. Homer, at
first glance, was critical of Bensley; whereas Gray’s began with the skeleton,
Bensley began with the tissues. But the teacher of the class was no fool; a
cadaverous man was Mr. Hood, but he pleased Homer Wells by announcing
that he did not intend to follow the text exactly—the class, like Gray’s, would
begin with the bones. Comforted by what, for him, was routine, Homer
relished his first look at the ancient yellowed skeleton of a rabbit. The class
was hushed; some students were repulsed. Wait till they get to the urogenital
system, thought Homer Wells, his eyes skimming over the perfect bones; but
this thought shocked him, too. He realized he was looking forward to getting
to the poor rabbit’s urogenital system.

He had a lateral view of the rabbit’s skull; he tested himself with the naming

of parts—it was so easy for him: cranial, orbital, nasal, frontal, mandible,
maxilla, premaxilla. How well he remembered Clara and the others who had
taught him so much!

As for Clara, she was finally put to rest in a place she might not have chosen

for herself—the cemetery in St. Cloud’s was in the abandoned part of town.
Perhaps this was appropriate, thought Dr. Larch, who supervised Clara’s
burial, because Clara herself had been abandoned—and surely she had been
more explored and examined than she had ever been loved.

Nurse Edna was shocked to see the departing coffin, but Nurse Angela

assured her that none of the orphans had passed away in the night. Mrs.
Grogan accompanied Dr. Larch to the cemetery; Larch had asked her to come
with him because he knew that Mrs. Grogan enjoyed every opportunity to say
her prayer. (There was no minister or priest or rabbi in St. Cloud’s; if holy
words were in order, someone from Three Mile Falls came and said them. It
was a testimony to Wilbur Larch’s increasing isolationism that he refused to
send to Three Mile Falls for anything, and that he preferred Mrs. Grogan—if
he was forced to listen to holy words at all.)

that his tears were not for Clara. Larch wouldn’t have buried Clara if he’d
thought that Homer Wells would ever be coming back.

Homer Wells will be back. He belongs here, like it or not.”

Is it the ether? Dr. Larch wondered. He meant, was it the ether that gave him

the sense, increasingly, that he knew everything that was going to happen?
For example, he had anticipated the letter that arrived for F. Stone—
forwarded from Fuzzy’s P.O. box address. “Is this some sick joke?” Nurse
Angela asked, turning the envelope around and around.

“I’ll take that, please,” Dr. Larch said. It was from the board of trustees, as

he had expected. That was why they’d wanted those follow-up reports from
him and why they’d requested the addresses of the orphans. They were
checking up on him, Larch knew.

knew a great deal about Fuzzy from Dr. Larch, but they wished to know
anything further about Fuzzy’s “St. Cloud’s experience”—anything, naturally,
that he wanted to “share” with them.

The “St. Cloud’s experience” sounded to Wilbur Larch like a mystical

happening. The attached questionnaire made him furious, although he did
amuse himself by trying to imagine which of the questions had been
conceived by the tedious Dr. Gingrich and which of them had flowed from the
chilling mind of Mrs. Goodhall. Dr. Larch also had fun imagining how Homer
Wells and Snowy Meadows and Curly Day—and all the others—would
answer the silly questionnaire, but he took the immediate business very
seriously. He wanted Fuzzy Stone’s answers to the questionnaire to be perfect.
He wanted to be sure that the board of trustees would never forget Fuzzy

Stone.

incorrect assumption that every child must have been at least five or six years
old before he—or she—was adopted. This and other stupidities convinced
Wilbur Larch that Dr. Gingrich and Mrs. Goodhall were going to be easy
adversaries.

1. Was your life at St. Cloud’s properly supervised? (Please include in your

answer if you ever felt that your treatment was especially affectionate, or
especially instructive; we would certainly want to hear if you felt your
treatment was ever abusive.)

2. Did you receive adequate medical attention at St. Cloud’s?
3. Were you adequately prepared for your new life in a foster home, and do

you feel your foster home was carefully and correctly chosen?

4. Would you suggest any possible improvements in the methods and

management of St. Cloud’s? (Specifically, would you feel things might
have gone more smoothly for you if there had been a more youthful,
energetic staff in residence—or perhaps, simply a larger staff?)

5. Was any attempt made to integrate the daily life of the orphanage with the

life of the surrounding community?

“What community?” screamed Wilbur Larch. He stood at the window in

Nurse Angela’s office and stared at the bleak hillside where Wally had wanted
to plant apple trees. Why hadn’t they come back and planted the stupid trees,
even if all that business was just to please me? Larch wondered.

“What community?” he howled.
Oh yes, he thought, I could have asked the stationmaster to offer them

religious instruction—to speak to them about the terrifying chaos of homeless
souls hovering in every niche of the sky. I could have asked that worthy
gentleman to display his underwear catalogues, too.

I could have asked the family of child beaters from Three Mile Falls to

come once a week and give lessons. I could have detained a few of the
women having abortions and asked them to reveal, to all of us, why they
didn’t want to have children at that particular moment in their lives; or I could
have invited a few of the mothers back—they could have explained to the
children why they were left here! That would have been instructive! Oh God,
thought Wilbur Larch, what a community we could have been—if only I’d
been more youthful, more energetic!

Oh yes, I have made some mistakes, he thought; and for a black hour or two,

he remembered some of them. If only I knew how to build a breathing
machine, he thought—if only I could have come up with a different set of

lungs for Fuzzy.

And maybe Homer Wells will tell them that he was not “adequately

prepared” for his first view of the fetus on the hill. And had there been a way
to prepare Homer for Three Mile Falls, for the Drapers of Waterville, or for
the Winkles being swept away? What was my choice? wondered Wilbur
Larch. I suppose that I could have not apprenticed him.

to the board of trustees. “It is better to do than to criticize,” wrote that young
idealist, Fuzzy Stone. “It is better to do anything than to stand idly by.” You
tell ’em, Fuzzy! thought Dr. Larch.

And so Fuzzy Stone told the board of trustees that the hospital at St. Cloud’s

was a model of the form. “It was Larch who made me want to be a doctor,”
Fuzzy wrote. “That old guy, Larch—he’s an inspiration. You talk about
energy: the guy is as full of pep as a teen-ager.

“You better be careful about sending any young people to St. Cloud’s—old

Larch will work them so hard, they’ll get sick. They’ll get so tired out, they’ll
retire in a month!

when Nurse Angela is pitching for stickball, you’d think you were competing
in an Olympic event. You talk about affectionate—that’s them, all right.
They’re always hugging and kissing you, but they know how to shake some
sense into you, too.

you were being watched by owls? That’s Nurse Edna and Nurse Angela—
they’re owls, they don’t miss a thing. And some of the girls used to say that
Mrs. Grogan knew what they did before they did it—before they even knew
they were going to do it!

“And you talk about community,” wrote Fuzzy Stone. “St. Cloud’s was

something special. Why, I remember people would get off the train and walk
up the hill just to look the place over—it must have been because we were
such a model community, for that area. I just remember these people, coming
and going, coming and going—they were just there to look us over, as if we
were one of the marvels of Maine.”

One of the marvels of Maine? thought Wilbur Larch, struggling to get

control of himself. A stray puff of wind blew in the open window in Nurse
Angela’s office, carrying some of the black smoke from the incinerator with
it; the smoke brought Larch nearer to his senses. I’d better stop, he thought. I
don’t want to get carried away.

He rested in the dispensary after his historical effort. Nurse Edna looked in

on him once; Wilbur Larch was one of the marvels of Maine to her, and she

was worried about him.

gone? The problem is that I have to last, he thought. He could rewrite history
but he couldn’t touch time; dates were fixed; time marched at its own pace.
Even if he could convince Homer Wells to go to a real medical school, it
would take time. It would take a few years for Fuzzy Stone to complete his
training. I have to last until Fuzzy is qualified to replace me, thought Wilbur
Larch.

He felt like hearing Mrs. Grogan’s prayer again, and so he went to the girls’

division a little early for his usual delivery of Jane Eyre. He eavesdropped in
the hall on Mrs. Grogan’s prayer; I must ask her if she’d mind saying it to the
boys, he thought, then wondered if it would confuse the boys, coming so
quickly on the heels of, or just before, the Princes of Maine, Kings of New
England benediction. I get confused myself sometimes, Dr. Larch knew.

“Grant us a safe lodging, and a holy rest,” Mrs. Grogan was saying, “and

peace at the last.”

something, and an ether addict, and who felt that he’d come a long way and
still had a long way to go.

When Homer Wells read the questionnaire sent him by the St. Cloud’s board
of trustees, he did not know exactly what made him anxious. Of course Dr.
Larch and the others were getting older, but they were always “older” to him.
It did occur to him to wonder what might happen to St. Cloud’s when Dr.
Larch was too old, but this thought was so troubling that he tucked the
questionnaire and the return envelope to the board into his copy of Practical
Anatomy of the Rabbit. Besides, it was the day the migrants arrived; it was
harvest time at Ocean View, and Homer Wells was busy.

He and Mrs. Worthington met the picking crew at the apple mart, and led

them to their quarters in the cider house—more than half the crew had picked
at Ocean View before and knew the way, and the crew boss was what Mrs.
Worthington called “an old hand.” He looked very young to Homer. It was the
first year that Mrs. Worthington dealt directly with the picking crew and their
boss; the hiring relationship, by mail, had been one of Senior Worthington’s
responsibilities, and Senior had always maintained that if you kept a good
crew boss, year after year, all the hiring—and the necessary taking-charge of
the crew during the harvest—would be conducted by the boss.

His name was Arthur Rose, and he looked about Wally’s age—just barely

older than Homer—although he must have been older; he’d been the crew
boss for five or six years. One year Senior Worthington had written to the old

man who’d been his crew boss for as long as Olive could remember and
Arthur Rose had written back to Senior saying he was going to be the crew
boss now—“the old boss,” Arthur Rose had written, “he’s dead tired of
traveling.” As it turned out, the old boss was just dead, but Arthur Rose had
done a good job. He brought the right number of pickers, and very few of
them ever quit, or ran off, or lost more than a day or two of good work
because of too much drinking. There seemed to be a firm control over the
degree of fighting among them—even when they were accompanied by a
woman or two. And when there was an occasional child among them, the
child behaved. There were always pickers who fell off ladders, but there’d
been no serious injuries. There were always small accidents around the cider
press—but that was fast, often late-night work, when the men were tired or
drinking a little. And there was the predictable clumsiness or drinking that led
to the infrequent accidents involved in the almost ritualistic use of the cider
house roof.

Running a farm had given Olive Worthington a warm feeling for the

daylight hours and a grave suspicion of the night; the most trouble that people
got into, in Olive’s opinion, was trouble that they encountered because they
stayed up too late.

picking-crew responsibility of Ocean View had now fallen to her. She wrote
him at the usual address—a P.O. box in a town called Green, South Carolina
—and Arthur Rose responded promptly, both with his condolences and with
his assurance that the crew would arrive as always, on time and in correct
numbers.

or when she annually noted it in his Christmas card (“Happy Holidays,
Arthur!”), Olive Worthington never called him Arthur; no one else called him
Arthur, either. For reasons that were never explained to Homer Wells but
perhaps for a presence of authority that was necessary for a good crew boss to
maintain, he was Mister Rose to everybody.

made clear. “Homer,” Olive said, “this is Mister Rose. And this is Homer
Wells,” Olive added.

“Glad to know you, Homer,” said Mr. Rose.
“Homer has become my good right hand,” Olive said affectionately.
“Glad to hear that, Homer!” said Mr. Rose. He shook Homer’s hand

strongly, although he let go of the hand with unusual quickness. He was no
better dressed than the rest of the picking crew, and he was slender, like most
of them; yet he managed a certain style with shabbiness. If his jacket was

dirty and torn, it was a pinstriped suit jacket, a double-breasted model that
had, in its history, given someone a degree of sharpness, and Mr. Rose wore a
real silk necktie for a belt. His shoes were also good, and good shoes were
vital for farm work; they were old, but well oiled, resoled, comfortable-
looking and in good condition. His socks matched. His suit jacket had a watch
pocket, and in it was a gold watch that worked; he regarded the watch
naturally and often, as if time were very important to him. He was so clean-
shaven he looked as if he might never have needed a shave; his face was a
smooth brick of the darkest, unsweetened, bitter chocolate, and in his mouth
he expertly moved around a small, bright-white mint, which always
surrounded him with a fresh and alert fragrance.

gesture he gave the impression of being humble and contained. Yet, when one
observed him standing still and not speaking, he looked extraordinarily fast
and sure of himself.

miss what little sea breeze there was. Mr. Rose and Mrs. Worthington stood
talking among the parked and moving farm vehicles in the apple-mart lot; the
rest of the picking crew waited in the their cars—the windows rolled down,
an orchestra of black fingers strumming the sides of the cars. There were
seventeen pickers and a cook—no women or children this year, to Olive’s
relief.

“Very nice,” Mr. Rose said, about the flowers in the cider house.
Mrs. Worthington touched the rules she’d tacked to the wall by the kitchen

light switch as she was leaving. “And you’ll point out these to everyone,
won’t you, please?” Olive asked.

watch the first press, Homer,” Mr. Rose said, as Homer held open the van
door for Olive. “I’m sure you got better things to watch—movies and stuff—
but if you ever got some time on your hands, you come watch us make a little
cider. About a thousand gallons,” he added shyly; he scuffed his feet, as if he
were ashamed that he might be bragging. “All we need is eight hours, and
about three hundred bushels of apples,” said Mr. Rose. “A thousand gallons,”
he repeated proudly.

On the way back to the apple mart, Olive Worthington said to Homer,

“Mister Rose is a real worker. If the rest of them were like him, they could
improve themselves.” Homer didn’t understand her tone. Certainly he had
heard in her voice admiration, sympathy—and even affection—but there was
also in her voice the ice that encases a long-ago and immovable point of view.

Fortunately, for Melony, the picking crew at York Farm included two women
and a child; Melony felt safe to stay in the cider house. One of the women
was a wife and the other woman was the first woman’s mother and the cook;
the wife picked with the crew, while the old lady looked after the food and the
child—who was silent to the point of nonexistence. There was only one
shower, and it was outdoors—installed behind the cider house, on a cinder-
block platform, under a former grape arbor whose trellises were rotted by the
weather. The women showered first, every evening, and they permitted no
peeking. The York Farm crew boss was a mild man—it was his wife who
came along—and he raised no objections to Melony’s sharing the cider house
with his crew.

habit of remarking during each activity that he’d rather be doing something
else. His authority seemed less certain, or at least less electrical, than the
authority commanded by Mr. Rose; no one called him Mister Rather. He was
a steady but not an exceptionally fast picker, yet he always accounted for over
a hundred bushels a day; it took Melony just one day to observe that his
fellow workers paid Rather a commission. They gave him one bushel for
every twenty bushels they picked.

of saying that his commission, under the circumstances, was “rather small,”
but Rather never suggested that Melony owed him anything. “After all, I
didn’t get you your job!” he told her cheerfully.

assisted as a bottler with the first cider press. Yet Melony was disappointed;
she’d found the time to ask if anyone had heard of Ocean View, and no one
had.

Melony brought to each of her experiences, Homer Wells needed a few days
to notice the commission Mr. Rose exacted from his crew. He was the fastest
picker among them, without ever appearing to rush—and he never dropped
fruit; he never bruised the apples by bumping his canvas picking bucket
against the ladder rungs. Mr. Rose could have managed a hundred and ten
bushels a day on his own, but—even with his speed—Homer realized that his
regular hundred and fifty or hundred and sixty bushels a day were very high.
He took as his commission only one bushel out of every forty, but he had a
crew of fifteen and no one picked fewer than eighty bushels a day. Mr. Rose
would pick a very fast half dozen bushels, then he’d just rest for a while, or
else he’d supervise the picking technique of his crew.

“A little slower, George,” he’d say. “You bruise that fruit, what’s it gonna be

good for?”

“Just cider,” George would say.
“That’s right,” Mr. Rose would say. “Cider apples is only a nickel a bushel.”
“Okay,” George would say.
“Sure,” Mr. Rose would say, “everythin’s gonna be okay.”
The third day it rained and no one picked; both apples and pickers slip in the

rain, and the fruit is more sensitive to bruising.

Homer went to watch Meany Hyde and Mr. Rose conduct the first cider

press, which they directed out of range of the splatter. They put two men on
the press, and two bottling, and they shifted fresh men into the rotation almost
every hour. Meany watched only one thing: whether the racks were stacked
crookedly or whether they were right. When the press boards are stacked
crookedly, you can lose the press—three bushels of apples in one mess, eight
or ten gallons of cider and the pomace flying everywhere. The men at the
press wore rubber aprons; the bottlers wore rubber boots. The whine of the
grinder reminded Homer Wells of the sounds he had only imagined at St.
Cloud’s—the saw-mill blades that were ear-splitting in his dreams, and in his
insomnia. The pump sucked, the spout disgorged a pulp of seeds and skin and
mashed apples, and even worms (if there were worms). It looked like what
Nurse Angela calmly called upchuck. From the big tub under the press, the
cider whirred through a rotary screen, which strained it into the thousand-
gallon vat where, only recently, Grace Lynch had exposed herself to Homer.

tracks rattled the jugs along, straight into cold storage. A man named
Branches was assigned to hose out the vat and rinse off the rotary screen; his
name stemmed from his dexterity in the big trees—and his scorn for using a
ladder. A man named Hero washed the press cloths; Meany Hyde told Homer
that the man had been a kind of hero, once. “That’s all I heard. He’s been
comin’ here for years, but he was a hero. Just once,” Meany added, as if there
might be more shame attached to the rarity of the man’s heroism than there
was glory to be sung for his moment in the sun.

been interesting; eight hours of hanging around a cider mill are several hours
in excess of interesting. “You got to come at night to get the real feel of it,”
Mr. Rose confided. “This was just a rainy-day press. When you pick all day
and press all night, then you get the feel of it.” He winked at Homer, assuming
he’d managed to make some secret life instantly clear; then he handed Homer
a cup of cider. Homer had been sipping cider all day, but the cup was offered
solemnly—some pledge about pressing cider at night was being made on the
spot—and so Homer took the cup and drank. His eyes watered instantly; the

cider was so strongly laced with rum that Homer felt his face flush and his
stomach glow. Without further acknowledgment, Mr. Rose took back the cup
and offered the remaining swallows to the man called Branches, who bolted it
down without needing to make the slightest adjustment on the spray nozzle of
his hose.

When Homer Wells was loading some cider jugs into the van, he saw the

cup make its way between Meany Hyde and the man called Hero—all of it
under the calm supervision of Mr. Rose, who had not revealed the source of
the rum to anyone. The phrase “a gift for concealment” occurred to Homer
Wells in regard to Mr. Rose; Homer had no idea where such a phrase had
come from, unless it was Charles Dickens or Charlotte Brontë—he doubted
he had encountered it in Gray’s Anatomy or in Bensley’s Practical Anatomy
of the Rabbit.

There were no movements wasted in what movement there was to be seen

by Mr. Rose—a quality that Homer Wells had formerly associated only with
Dr. Larch; surely Dr. Larch had other, quite different qualities, as did Mr.
Rose.

Back at the apple mart, the harvest appeared at a momentary standstill, held

up by the rain, which Big Dot Taft and the mart women watched sourly from
their assembly-line positions along the conveyor tracks in the packing line.

as the first cider usually is, and too watery—composed, typically, of early
Macs and Gravensteins. You don’t get a good cider until October, Meany
Hyde had told Homer, and Mr. Rose had confirmed this with a solemn nod. A
good cider needs some of those last-picked apples—Golden Delicious and
Winter Banana, and the Baldwins or Russets, too.

cigarette listlessly.

Homer Wells, listening to Big Dot Taft, felt like her voice—dulled. Wally

was away, Candy was away, and the anatomy of a rabbit was, after Clara, no
challenge; the migrants, whom he’d so eagerly anticipated, were just plain
hard workers; life was just a job. He had grown up without noticing when?
Was there nothing remarkable in the transition?

They had four days of good picking weather at Ocean View before Meany

Hyde said there would be a night press and Mr. Rose again invited Homer to
come to the cider house and “get the feel of it.” Homer had a quiet dinner
with Mrs. Worthington and only after he’d helped her wash the dishes did he
say he thought he’d go to the cider house and see if he could help with the
pressing; he knew they would have been hard at work for two or three hours.

“What a good worker you are, Homer!” Olive told him appreciatively.

McIntosh apples—warm, sunny days, and cold nights. It was not so cold that
Homer couldn’t smell the apples as he walked to the cider house, and it was
not so dark that he needed to keep on the dirt road; he could go overland.
Because he was not on the road, he was able to approach the cider house
unobserved.

and listened to the sounds of the men working the press, and talking, and
laughing—and the murmur of the men who were talking and laughing on the
cider house roof. Homer Wells listened for a long time, but he realized that
when the men were not making an effort to be understood by a white person,
he couldn’t understand them at all—not even Mr. Rose, whose clear voice
appeared to punctuate the other voices with calm but emphatic interjections.

interested; she wasn’t trying to understand either the process or the lingo. The
crew boss, Rather, had made it clear to her that the men resented her working
the press, or even bottling; it cut into their extra pay. Melony was tired from
the picking, anyway. She lay on her bed in the bunkroom of the cider house,
reading Jane Eyre; there was a man asleep at the far end of the bunkroom, but
Melony’s reading light didn’t disturb him—he had drunk too much beer,
which was all that Rather allowed the men to drink. The beer was kept in the
cold-storage room, right next to the mill, and the men were drinking and
talking together while they ran the press.

bed not far from Melony, trying to mend a zipper on a pair of one of the
men’s trousers. The man’s name was Sammy and he had only one pair of
trousers; every so often he’d wander in from the mill room to see how
Sandra’s work was progressing—an overlarge, ballooning pair of undershorts
hanging almost to his knobby knees, his legs below the knees like tough little
vines.

meals for the crew, lay in a big lump on the bed next to Sandra, more than her
share of blankets piled on top of her—she was always cold, but it was the
only thing she complained about.

Sammy came into the bunkroom, sipping a beer and bringing with him the

apple-mash odor of the mill room; the splatter from the press dotted his bare
legs.

“Legs like that, no wonder you want your pants back,” Sandra said.
“What are my chances?” Sammy asked.
“One, your zipper is jammed. Two, you tore it off your pants,” Sandra said.

from her lumped position.

grinder caught on something—a thick stem or a congestion of seeds—and it
made a noise like a circular saw gagging on a knot. When that happened, Ma
would say, “There goes somebody’s hand.” Or, “There goes somebody’s
whole head. Drunk too much beer and fell in.”

view. The two women were nice to her once they realized she was not after
any of the men. The men were respectful of her work—and of the mark upon
her that was made by the missing boyfriend. Although they teased her, they
meant her no harm.

would, had gotten around. The man was named Wednesday, for no reason that
was ever explained to Melony—and she wasn’t interested enough to ask.
Wednesday had asked her too many questions about the particular Ocean
View she was looking for and the boyfriend she was trying to find.

without shaking any apples to the ground; Wednesday was helping her, when
Melony said, “Pretty tight pants I’m wearing, wouldn’t you say?”

Wednesday looked at her and said, “Yeah, I would.”
“You can see everything in the pockets, right?” Melony asked.
Wednesday looked again and saw only the odd sickle shape of the partially

opened horn-rim barrette; tight and hard against the worn denim, it dug into
Melony’s thigh. It was the barrette that Mary Agnes Cork had stolen from
Candy, and Melony had stolen for herself. One day, she imagined, her hair
might be long enough for the barrette to be of use. Until such a time, she
carried it like a pocket knife in her right-thigh pocket.

“What’s that?” Wednesday asked.
“That’s a penis knife,” Melony said.
“A what knife?” Wednesday said.
“You heard me,” Melony said. “It’s real small and it’s real sharp—it’s good

for just one thing.”

“What’s that?” Wednesday asked.
“It cuts off the end of a penis,” Melony said. “Real fast, real easy—just the

end.”

might have asked Melony to display the penis knife—just as an object of
general appreciation among knife-carrying friends. But no one asked; the
story appeared to hold. It allied itself with the other stories attached to

Melony and solidified the underlying, uneasy feeling among the workers at
York Farm: that Melony was no one to mess with. Around Melony, even the
beer drinkers behaved.

pressed cider was the frequency of their urinating, which Melony objected to
only when they peed too near the cider house.

could hear anyone pissing. “I don’t want to smell it later, either! Get away
from the building. What’s the matter—you afraid of the dark?”

Sandra and Ma liked Melony for that, and they enjoyed the refrain;

whenever they heard someone peeing, they would not fail to holler, in unison,
“What’s the matter? You afraid of the dark?”

But if everyone tolerated Melony’s hardness, or even appreciated her for it,

no one liked her reading at night. She was the only one who read anything,
and it took a while for her to realize how unfriendly they thought reading was,
how insulted they felt when she did it.

Melony asked, as usual, if her reading light was going to bother anyone.

“The light don’t bother nobody,” Wednesday said.
There were murmurs of consent, and Rather said, “You all remember

Cameron?” There was laughter and Rather explained to Melony that
Cameron, who had worked at York Farm for years, had been such a baby that
he needed a light on, all night, just to sleep.

said.

“What animals?” Melony asked.
“Cameron didn’t know,” somebody said.
Melony kept reading Jane Eyre, and after a while, Sandra said, “It’s not the

light that bothers us, Melony.”

became aware that they had all rolled toward her in their beds and were
watching her sullenly.

“Okay,” she said. “So what bothers you?”
“What you readin’ about, anyway?” Wednesday asked.
“Yeah,” Sammy said. “What’s so special ’bout that book?”
“It’s just a book,” Melony said.
“Pretty big deal that you can read it, huh?” Wednesday asked.
“What?” said Melony.
“Maybe, if you like it so much,” Rather said, “we might like it, too.”
“You want me to read to you?” Melony asked.

“Somebody read to me, once,” Sandra said.
“It wasn’t me!” Ma said. “It wasn’t your father, either!”
“I never said it was!” Sandra said.
“I never heard nobody read to nobody,” Sammy said.
“Yeah,” somebody said.
Melony saw that some of the men were propped on their elbows in their

beds, waiting. Even Ma turned her great lump around and faced Melony’s
bed.

“Quiet, everybody,” Rather said.
For the first time in her life, Melony was afraid. After all her efforts and her

hard traveling, she felt she had been returned to the girls’ division without
being aware of it; but it wasn’t only that. It was the first time anyone had
expected something of her; she knew what Jane Eyre meant to her, but what
could it mean to them? She’d read it to children too young to understand half
the words, too young to pay attention until the end of a sentence, but they
were orphans—prisoners of the routine of being read to aloud; it was the
routine that mattered.

Eyre. She said, “I’m on page two hundred and eight. There’s a lot that’s
happened before.”

“Just read it,” Sammy said.
“Maybe I should start at the beginning,” Melony suggested.
“Just read what you readin’ to yourself,” Rather said gently.
Her voice had never trembled before, but Melony began.
“ ‘The wind roared high in the great tree which embowered the gates,’ ” she

read.

“What’s ‘embowered’?” Wednesday asked her.
“Like a bower,” Melony said. “Like a thing hanging over you, like for

grapes or roses.”

“It’s a kind of bower where the shower is,” Sandra said.
“Oh,” someone said.
“ ‘But the road as far as I could see,’ ” Melony continued, “ ‘to the right

hand and left, was all still and solitary . . .’ ”

“What’s that?” Sammy asked.
“Solitary is alone,” Melony said.
“Like solitaire, you know solitaire,” Rather said, and there was an approving

murmur.

“Shut up your interruptin’,” Sandra said.
“Well, we got to understand,” Wednesday said.
“Just shut up,” Ma said.

“Read,” Rather said to Melony, and she tried to go on.
“ ‘. . . the road . . . all still and solitary: save for the shadows of clouds

crossing it at intervals, as the moon looked out, it was but a long pale line,
unvaried by one moving speck,’ ” Melony read.

“Un-what?” someone asked.
“Unvaried means unchanged, not changed,” Melony said.
“I know that,” Wednesday said. “I got that one.”
“Shut up,” Sandra said.
“ ‘A puerile tear,’ ” Melony began, but she stopped. “I don’t know what

‘puerile’ means,” she said. “It’s not important that you know what every word
means.”

“Okay,” someone said.
“ ‘A puerile tear dimmed my eye while I looked—a tear of disappointment

and impatience: ashamed of it, I wiped it away . . .’ ”

“There, we know what it is, anyway,” Wednesday said.
“ ‘. . . I lingered,’ ” Melony read.
“You what?” Sammy asked.
“Hung around; to linger means to hang around!” Melony said sharply. She

began again “ ‘. . . the moon shut herself wholly within her chamber, and
drew close her curtain of dense cloud; the night grew dark . . .’ ”

“It’s gettin’ scary now,” Wednesday observed.
“ ‘. . . rain came driving fast on the wind.’ ” Melony had changed “gale” to

“wind” without their knowing it. “ ‘I wish he would come! I wish he would
come! I exclaimed, seized with hypochondriac foreboding.’ ” Melony stopped
with that; tears filled her eyes, and she couldn’t see the words. There was a
long silence before anyone spoke.

“What was she seized with?” Sammy asked, frightened.
“I don’t know!” Melony said, sobbing. “Some kind of fear, I think.”
They were respectful of Melony’s sobs for a while, and then Sammy said, “I

guess it’s some kind of horror story.”

with friendly concern, but Melony lay down on her bed and turned off her
reading light.

When all the lights were out, Melony felt Sandra sit on her bed beside her; if

it had been Ma, she knew, her bed would have sagged more heavily. “You ask
me, you better forget that boyfriend,” Sandra said. “If he didn’t tell you how
to find him, he ain’t no good, anyway.” Melony had not felt anyone stroke her
temples since Mrs. Grogan in the girls’ division at St. Cloud’s; she realized
she missed Mrs. Grogan very much, and for a while this took her mind off
Homer Wells.

whatever failure Jane Eyre might be for someone else, it had always worked
for Melony—it had helped her—and she felt in need of its help, now. She
read another twenty pages, or so, but Homer Wells would not leave her mind.
“I must part with you for my whole life,” she read, with horror. “I must begin
a new existence amongst strange faces and strange scenes.” The truth of that
closed the book for her, forever. She slid the book under her bed in the
bunkroom in the cider house at York Farm, where she would leave it. Had she
just read the passage from David Copperfield that Homer Wells so loved and
repeated to himself as if it were a hopeful prayer, she would have discarded
David Copperfield, too. “I have stood aside to see the phantoms of those days
go by me.” Fat chance! Melony would have thought. She knew that all the
phantoms of those days were attached to her and Homer more securely than
their shadows. And so Melony cried herself to sleep—she was not hopeful,
yet she was determined, her mind’s eye searching the darkness for Homer
Wells.

range of the lights shining from the mill room at Ocean View. Even if he’d
sneezed or fallen down, the sound of the grinder and the pump would have
concealed his presence. He watched the red-eyed glow of the cigarettes that
darted and paused above the roof of the cider house. When he got cold, he
went to watch them pressing and to have a little cider and rum.

cider in it, and together they watched the orchestra of the pump and grinder. A
man named Jack, who had a terrible scar across his throat—a hard-to-survive
kind of scar—aimed the spout. A man named Orange slapped the racks in
place and received the splatter with a wild kind of pride; his name was
Orange because he had tried to dye his hair once, and orange was how it
turned out—there was no evidence of that color on him now. The rum had
made Jack and Orange both savage about their business and defiantly unwary
of the flying mess, yet Homer felt that Mr. Rose, who seemed sober, was still
in control—the conductor of both the men and the machinery and operating
them both at full throttle.

choked the flow of pomace to the top rack; Orange levered the press into
place.

know were bottling at high speed. One of the men began to laugh, and his
partner started to laugh with him so loudly that Mr. Rose called out to them,
“What’s so funny?”

One of the men explained that his cigarette had fallen out of his mouth, into

the vat; at this announcement, even Jack and Orange began to laugh, and
Homer Wells smiled, but Mr. Rose said quietly, “Then you better fish it out.
Nobody wants that muckin’ up the cider.”

screaming. “Go on,” Mr. Rose repeated. “Go fish.”

The man with the lost cigarette stared into the thousand-gallon vat; it was

only half full, but it was still a swimming pool. He took off his rubber boots,
but Mr. Rose said, “Not just the boots. Take off all your clothes, and then go
take a shower—and be quick about it. We got work to do.”

in there!”

“You’re filthy all over,” said Mr. Rose. “Be quick about it.”
“Hey, you can be quick about it,” the man said to Mr. Rose. “You want that

butt out of there, you can fish it out yourself.”

It was Orange who spoke to the man.
“What business you in?” Orange asked him.
“Hey, what?” the man asked.
“What business you in, man?” Orange asked.
“Say, you in the apple business, man,” Jack advised the man.
“Say, what?” the man asked.
“Just say you in the apple business, man,” Orange said.
It was at that moment that Mr. Rose took Homer’s arm and said to him,

“You got to see the view from the roof, my friend.” The tug at his elbow was
firm but gentle. Mr. Rose very gracefully led Homer out of the mill room,
then outside by the kitchen door.

“You know what business Mistuh Rose is in, man?” Homer heard Orange

asking.

“He in the knife business, man,” he heard Jack say.
“You don’t wanna go in the knife business with Mistuh Rose,” Homer heard

Orange say.

“You just stay in the apple business, you do fine, man,” Jack said.
Homer was following Mr. Rose up the ladder to the roof when he heard the

shower turn on; it was an inside shower—more private than the shower at
York Farm. Except for their cigarettes, the men on the roof were hard to see,
but Homer held Mr. Rose’s hand and followed him along the plank on the
rooftop until they found two good seats.

blur of greetings. The man called Hero was up there, and the man called
Branches; there was someone named Willy, and two or three people Homer

didn’t know, and the old cook whose name was Black Pan. The cook was the
shape of a stew pot; it had required some effort for him to gain his perch on
the roof.

rum.

“It’s stopped again,” Branches said, and everyone stared toward the sea.
The night-life lights of Cape Kenneth were so low along the horizon that

some of the lights themselves were not visible—only the reflections from
them, especially when the lights were cast out over the ocean—but the high
Ferris wheel blazed brightly. It was holding still, loading new riders, letting
off the old.

“Maybe it stop to breathe,” Branches said, and everyone laughed at that.
Someone suggested that it stopped to fart, and everyone laughed louder.
Then Willy said, “When it gets too close to the ground, it has to stop, I

think,” and everyone appeared to consider this seriously.

house released a reverential moan.

“There it go again!” Hero said.
“It like a star,” Black Pan, the old cook, said. “It look real cool, but you get

too close, it burn you—it hotter than a flame!”

“It’s a Ferris wheel,” said Homer Wells.
“It a what?” Willy said.
“A what wheel?” Branches asked.
“A Ferris wheel,” said Homer Wells. “That’s the Cape Kenneth Carnival,

and that’s the Ferris wheel.” Mr. Rose nudged him in the ribs, but Homer
didn’t understand. No one spoke for a long time, and when Homer looked at
Mr. Rose, Mr. Rose softly shook his head.

Charleston.”

“It’s stopped again,” Hero observed.
“It’s letting off passengers—riders,” said Homer Wells. “It’s taking on new

riders.”

“People ride that fuckin’ thing?” Branches asked.
“Don’t shit me, Homer,” Hero said.
Again, Homer felt the nudge in his ribs, and Mr. Rose said, mildly, “You all

so uneducated—Homer’s havin’ a little fun with you.”

along.

“Don’t the name Homer mean nothin’ to you?” Mr. Rose asked the men.
“I think I heard of it,” the cook Black Pan said.

at Homer’s ribs was back, and Mr. Rose said, “Our Homer knows a good
story, too.”

“Shit,” someone said after a while.
“What kind of wheel you call it, Homer?” Branches asked.
“A Ferris wheel,” said Homer Wells.
“Yeah!” someone said. Everyone laughed.
“A fuckin’ Ferris wheel!” Hero said. “That’s pretty good.”
One of the men Homer didn’t know rolled off the roof. Everyone waited

until he was on the ground before they called down to him.

“You all right, asshole?” Black Pan asked.
“Yeah,” the man said, and everyone laughed.
When Mr. Rose heard the shower start up again, he knew that his bottle man

had found the cigarette and was washing the cider off himself.

“Willy and Hero, you’re bottlin’ now,” said Mr. Rose.
“I bottled last time,” Hero said.
“Then you gettin’ real good at it,” said Mr. Rose.
“I’ll press for a while,” someone said.
“Jack and Orange are goin’ good,” Mr. Rose said. “We’ll just let them go for

a while.”

each other with the ladder; on the ground Mr. Rose spoke very seriously to
Homer.

what that thing is. What good it do them to know?”

lights blazing in the mill room. Now that he was more familiar with their
dialect, he could occasionally understand the voices from the roof.

“It’s stopped again,” he heard Branches say.
“Yeah, it takin’ on riders!” someone said, and everyone laughed.
“You know, maybe it’s an army place,” Black Pan said.
“What army?” someone asked.
“We almost at war,” Black Pan said. “I heard that.”
“Shit,” someone said.
“It’s somethin’ for the airplanes to see,” Black Pan said.
“Whose airplanes?” Hero asked.
“There it go again,” Branches said.
Homer Wells walked back through the orchards to the Worthington house;

he was touched that Mrs. Worthington had left the light over the stairs on for
him, and when he saw the light under her bedroom door, he said, quietly,

“Good night, Missus Worthington. I’m back.”

“Good night, Homer,” she said.
He looked out Wally’s window for a while. There was no way, at that

distance, that he could witness the reaction on the cider house roof when the
Ferris wheel in Cape Kenneth was shut off for the night—when all the lights
went out with a blink, what did the men on the roof have to say about that? he
wondered.

when all the lights went out, that it had returned there.

Curly Day, and young Copperfield! And it would have been fun to ride it with
Melony—just once, to see what she would have said about it. Dr. Larch
wouldn’t be impressed. Was anything a mystery to Dr. Larch?

came up to Homer, who was working as a checker in the orchard called
Frying Pan, counting the one-bushel crates before they were loaded on the
flatbed trailer and giving every picker credit for each bushel picked.

“I want you to show me that wheel,” Mr. Rose said, smiling.
“The Ferris wheel?” said Homer Wells.
“If you don’t mind showin’ me,” said Mr. Rose. “There just can’t be no talk

about it.”

close it for the season. I’ll bet it’s pretty cold, riding it now.”

“I don’t know if I want to ride it until I see it,” said Mr. Rose.
“Sure,” said Homer.
Mrs. Worthington let him take the van, but when he picked up Mr. Rose at

the cider house, everyone was curious.

“We’ve got to check somethin’ in the far orchard,” Mr. Rose told the men.
“What far orchard he talkin’ about?” Black Pan asked Hero when Homer

and Mr. Rose got in the van.

much colder now, and Mr. Rose was subdued all the way to Cape Kenneth
and uncharacteristically drawn into himself as they walked through the
carnival together. The summer crowd was gone; some of the carnival events
were already closed up tight.

safe.”

my color around here?”

orphan, he always suspected that people singled him out to stare at—and so
he had not felt especially singled out in the company of Mr. Rose. But now he
noticed more of the looks and realized that the looks an orphan might detect
were only imagined, by comparison.

for the ride in progress to be over. When the wheel stopped, Homer and Mr.
Rose got on and sat together in one chair.

“We could each sit in our own chairs, if you prefer,” said Homer Wells.
“Keep it like it is,” said Mr. Rose. When the wheel began its ascent, he sat

very still and straight and held his breath until they were nearly at the top of
the rise.

“Over there’s the orchard,” pointed Homer Wells, but Mr. Rose stared

straight ahead, as if the stability of the entire Ferris wheel relied on each
rider’s maintaining perfect balance.

“What’s so special about doin’ this?” asked Mr. Rose rigidly.
“It’s just for the ride, and the view, I guess,” said Homer Wells.
“I like the view from the roof,” Mr. Rose said. When they started the descent

of the wheel turn, Mr. Rose said, “It’s a good thing I didn’t eat much today.”

By the time they passed ground level and began their ascent again, a

substantial crowd had formed—but they didn’t appear to be standing in line
for the next ride. There were only two couples and one boy by himself sharing
the wheel with Homer and Mr. Rose, and when they were at the top of the
wheel turn again, Homer realized that the crowd below them had formed to
stare at Mr. Rose.

“They come to see if niggers fly,” Mr. Rose said, “but I ain’t goin’ nowhere

—not for no one’s entertainment. They come to see if the machine is gonna
break down, tryin’ to carry a nigger—or maybe they wanna see me throw up.”

“Just don’t do anything,” Homer Wells said.
“That’s the advice I been hearin’ all my life, boy,” Mr. Rose said. As they

started their descent, Mr. Rose leaned out of the chair—quite dangerously
farther than was necessary—and vomited in a splendid arc over the crowd
below them. The crowd moved as one, but not everyone moved in time.

was stopped so that the sick man could get off. The crowd had retreated,
except for a young man who was especially splattered. As Homer Wells and
Mr. Rose were leaving the Ferris wheel grounds, the young man came
forward and said to Mr. Rose, “You looked like you meant to do that.”

walking away then.

“What business you in?” Mr. Rose asked the boy.
“What?” the young man asked, but Homer Wells stepped between them.
“My friend is sick,” Homer Wells said. “Please just leave him alone.”
“Your friend!” the boy said.
“Ask me what business I’m in,” Mr. Rose said to the boy.
“What fuckin’ business are you in, Mister?” the young man shouted at Mr.

Rose. Homer felt himself neatly shoved out of the way; he saw that Mr. Rose
was standing, very suddenly, chest to chest with the boy. There was no sour
smell of vomit on Mr. Rose’s breath, however. Somehow, Mr. Rose had
slipped one of those mints in his mouth; the alertness that had been missing
when Mr. Rose felt ill was back in his eyes. The boy seemed surprised that he
was standing so close to Mr. Rose, and so suddenly; he was a little taller, and
quite a bit heavier, than Mr. Rose, yet he looked unsure of himself. “I said,
‘What fuckin’ business are you in, Mister?’ ” the boy repeated, and Mr. Rose
smiled.

“I’m in the throwin’-up business!” Mr. Rose said in a humble manner.

Someone in the crowd laughed; Homer Wells felt a surge of vast relief; Mr.
Rose smiled in such a way that allowed the boy to smile, too. “Sorry if any of
it got on you,” Mr. Rose said nicely.

steps, the boy turned inquisitively in Mr. Rose’s direction, but Mr. Rose had
grasped Homer Wells by the arm and was already walking on. Homer saw
shock on the boy’s face. The young man’s flannel jacket, which was still
zipped shut, was flapping wide open—a single, crisp slash had slit it from the
collar to the waist—and every button on the boy’s shirt was gone. The boy
gaped at himself, and then at Mr. Rose, who did not look back, and then the
boy allowed himself to be pulled into the comfort of the crowd.

“How’d you do that?” Homer asked Mr. Rose, when they reached the van.
“Your hands got to be fast,” Mr. Rose said. “Your knife got to be sharp. But

you do it with your eyes. Your eyes keep their eyes off your hands.”

The wide-open jacket of the boy made Homer remember Clara and how a

scalpel made no mistakes. Only a hand makes mistakes. His chest was cold,
and he was driving too fast.

the cider house, Mr. Rose said, “You see? I was right, wasn’t I? What good is
it—to apple pickers—to know about that wheel?”

It does no good to know about it, thought Homer Wells. And what good

would it do Melony to know about it, or Curly Day, or Fuzzy—or any

Bedouin?

“Am I right?” Mr. Rose demanded.
“Right,” said Homer Wells.

Opportunity Knocks

After the harvest at York Farm, the foreman asked Melony to stay on to help
with the mousing. “We have to get the mice before the ground freezes, or else
they’ll have the run of the orchards all winter,” the foreman explained. The
men used poison oats and poison corn, scattering the poison around the trees
and putting it in the pine mice tunnels.

Poor mice, thought Melony, but she tried mousing for a few days. When she

saw a pine mouse tunnel, she tried to conceal it; she never put any poison in
it. And she only pretended to scatter the oats and corn around the trees; she
didn’t like the way the poison smelled. She would dump it into the dirt road
and fill her bag with sand and gravel and scatter that instead.

“Have a nice winter, mice,” she whispered to them.
It began to get very cold in the cider house; they gave her a woodburning

stove, which Melony vented through a window in the bunkroom; the stove
kept the toilet from freezing. The morning the outdoor shower was frozen was
the morning Melony decided to move on. She only briefly regretted not being
able to stay and save more mice.

“If you’re lookin’ for another orchard,” the foreman warned her, “you won’t

find any that’s hirin’ in the winter.”

“I’d like a city job for the winter,” Melony told him.
“What city?” the foreman asked. Melony shrugged. She had securely

strapped up her small bundle of things in Charley’s belt; the sleeves of Mrs.
Grogan’s coat reached only halfway down her forearms, and the coat was an
especially tight fit across the shoulders and the hips—even so, Melony
managed to look comfortable in it. “There’s no real cities in Maine,” the
foreman told her.

“It won’t take much of a city to be a city for me,” Melony said. He watched

her walk to the same part of the road where he’d called good-bye to her
before. It was that time of year when the trees are bare and the sky looks like

lead, and underfoot the ground feels more unyielding every day—yet it’s too
early for snow, or else there’s a freak storm and the snow doesn’t last.

surprised himself by muttering out loud, “I hope it snows soon.”

“What?” one of the apple-mart women said.
“So long!” the foreman called to Melony, but she didn’t answer him.
“Good riddance,” said one of the women in the mart.
“The slut,” another one said.
“What makes her a slut?” the foreman asked sharply. “Who you seen her

sleepin’ with?”

“She’s just a tramp,” one of them said.
“At least she’s interesting,” the foreman snapped. The women regarded him

for a moment before one of them spoke up.

“Got a crush on her, do you?” she asked.
“I’ll bet you wish you was that boyfriend she’s lookin’ for,” another woman

said, which drew a teasing sort of laughter from all the mart women.

—for his sake!” the foreman said. “And for hers,” he added.

this conversation. She opened the large, communal thermos on the table next
to the cash register; but when she tried to pour herself some coffee, none
came out. What came out instead was poison oats and poison corn. If Melony
had actually meant to poison any of them, she would have been more
restrained in the proportions. It was clearly just a message, and the apple-mart
women regarded it as silently as if they were trying to read bones.

from a display basket on the counter and took a healthy chomp; the apple had
been left out in the cold so long that it was partially frozen, and so mealy in
the foreman’s mouth that he instantly spat it out.

up; also, since there was no traffic, she had no choice about walking. When
she reached the coastal highway, she didn’t have to wait long for a ride. A
pale but jolly boy driving a panel truck stopped for her.

was a little younger than Homer Wells, and—in Melony’s opinion—not
nearly so worldly-looking. The truck reeked of wood-stain smells and of
varnish and creosote. “I’m a wood-treatment expert,” the boy said to her
proudly.

At best, a salesman, Melony thought; more likely, a delivery boy. She smiled

of greeting from her. I can make anyone nervous in less than a minute,
Melony thought.

“Uh, where you goin’?” the boy asked her—the panel truck sloshing along.
“The city,” Melony said.
“What city?” the boy asked.
Now Melony allowed her lips to part with her smile—the worried boy now

staring at the troubled history of her mouth.

“You tell me,” Melony said.
“I gotta go to Bath,” the boy said nervously. Melony stared at him as if he’d

said he had to have a bath.

“Bath,” she repeated.
“It’s a city, sort of,” the wood-treatment expert told her.
It was Clara’s city! Dr. Larch or Homer Wells could have told Melony—old

Clara had come to St. Cloud’s from Bath! But Melony didn’t know that, and
wouldn’t have cared; her relationship to Clara had been unpleasantly envious.
Homer Wells knew Clara more intimately than he knew Melony. It might
have interested Melony that Bath would put her much closer to Ocean View
than she’d been at York Farm—that there might even be residents of Bath
who would have heard of an Ocean View Orchards; there were certainly
many Bath residents who could have directed her to Heart’s Haven or to
Heart’s Rock.

“You wanna go to Bath?” the boy asked her cautiously.
Again Melony showed him her damaged teeth; she was displaying less of a

smile than of the manner in which a dog might show its hackles. “Right,” she
said.

Wally came home for Thanksgiving; Candy had been home for several
weekends in the early fall, but Homer had not known how to initiate seeing
her without Wally. Wally was surprised that Homer and Candy hadn’t seen
each other; and, from Candy’s embarrassment with Wally’s surprise, Homer
detected that she had been equally troubled about initiating a meeting with
him. But the turkey had to be basted every fifteen minutes, the table had to be
set, and Olive was too obviously enjoying having a full house again—there
was no time to feel awkward.

Raymond Kendall had shared a Thanksgiving dinner with the Worthingtons

before, but never without Senior’s semi-presence; Ray went through a few
minutes of struggling to be overly polite before he relaxed and talked shop
with Olive.

“Dad acts like he’s having a date,” Candy said to Olive in the kitchen.
“I’m flattered,” Olive said, squeezing Candy’s arm and laughing. But that

was the end of any further nonsense.

said, “You should be a surgeon, Homer!”

Ray Kendall said, “The boy’s just good with his hands. If you’ve got good
hands, once you do a thing your hands won’t forget how.”

Homer’s work with the knife; he carved every bit of meat off the bones as
quickly as possible.

college to go to flying school. “So if there is a war—if we get into it, I mean
—then I’ll already know how to fly.”

“You’ll do no such thing,” Olive said to him.
“Why would you want to do such a thing?” Candy asked him. “I think

you’re being selfish.”

serving your country!”

“To you, it’s an adventure,” Candy said. “That’s what’s selfish about it.”
“You’ll do no such thing, anyway,” Olive repeated.
“I was too young to go to the last war,” Ray said, “and if there’s another one,

I’ll be too old.”

“Lucky you!” Olive said.
“That’s right,” Candy said.
Ray shrugged. “I don’t know,” he said. “I wanted to go to the last one. I tried

to lie about my age, but someone told on me.”

“Now you know better,” Olive said.
“I’m not so sure of that,” Ray said. “If there’s a new one, there’ll be lots of

new weapons—they’re buildin’ stuff you can’t even imagine.”

“I try to imagine it,” Wally said. “I imagine the war all the time.”
“Except the dying, Wally,” Olive Worthington said, carrying the turkey

carcass out to the kitchen. “I don’t think you’ve imagined the dying.”

looked at him and smiled.

“You should have called me on the weekends, Homer,” she said.
“Yeah, why didn’t you?” Wally asked him. “Too busy with Debra Pettigrew,

that’s why.” Homer just shook his head.

kitchen.

“The what?” Wally said.
But Olive was wrong. It had taken Homer only about three weeks of Senior

Biology to realize that he knew more about the particular animal under
scrutiny and its relation to human anatomy than did his cadaverous teacher,
Mr. Hood.

revealed Mr. Hood’s deficiencies in comparison to the experience of young
Dr. Wells. In discussing the three stages of specialization of the uterus, Mr.
Hood became confused. The intrauterine life of the rabbit embryo is only
thirty days; between five to eight young are born. In keeping with the
primitive nature of the little animal, the rabbit has two complete uteri—the
structure of the organ at this stage is called uterus duplex. The structure of the
organ in the human female, which Homer Wells knew very well—wherein
two uterine tubes open into a single uterine cavity—is called uterus simplex.
The third stage of uterine structure falls between the two—a partially fused
condition existing in some mammals (sheep, for example); it is called uterus
bicornis.

chalky blackboard, confused his duplex with his bicornis; he called a sheep a
rabbit (and vice versa). It was a smaller error than if he’d imagined the human
female had two complete uteri and had spread this misinformation to the
class, but it was an error; Homer Wells caught it. It was the first time he had
been put in a position of correcting an authority. “An orphan is especially
uncomfortable and insecure in such a position,” wrote Dr. Wilbur Larch.

“Excuse me, sir?” said Homer Wells.
“Yes, Homer?” said Mr. Hood. His gauntness, in a certain light, made him

appear as exposed as the many rabbit cadavers lying open on the students’
laboratory tables. He looked skinned, almost ready for labeling. A kind but
weary patience was in his eyes; they were the man’s only alert features.

“It’s the other way around, sir,” said Homer Wells.
“Pardon me?” said Mr. Hood.
“The rabbit has two complete uteri, the rabbit is uterus duplex—not the

sheep, sir,” Homer said. “The sheep’s uterus is partially fused together, it’s
almost one—the sheep is uterus bicornis.”

regarding a fly, but he suddenly retreated. “Isn’t that what I said?” he asked,
smiling.

“No,” the class murmured, “you said it the other way around.”
“Well, it’s my mistake, then,” Mr. Hood said almost cheerfully. “I meant it

just the way you said it, Homer,” he said.

“No, you got it right.”

The short boy named Bucky, with whom Homer had to share his rabbit

cadaver, nudged Homer in the ribs. “How come you know all about cunts?”
he asked Homer.

Pettigrew. It was the one game they played. He would ask her something she
couldn’t answer. She would say “Search me.” And Homer Wells, saying
“Okay,” would begin to search her. “Not there!” Debra would cry, pushing his
hand away, but laughing. Always laughing, but always pushing his hand
away. There was no way Homer Wells would gain admittance to the uterus
simplex of Debra Pettigrew.

together in Wally’s bedroom, Thanksgiving night.

“I wouldn’t go that far, old boy,” Wally said.
Homer didn’t tell Wally about embarrassing Mr. Hood, or how the man

seemed changed by the incident. If Mr. Hood had always been cadaverous,
now there was an insomnia about his presence, too—as if he were not only
dead but also working too hard; staying up late; boning up on his rabbit
anatomy; trying to keep all the uteri straight. His tiredness made him slightly
less cadaverous, but only because exhaustion is a life-sign; it is at least a form
of being human. Mr. Hood began to look as if he were waiting for his
retirement, hoping that he could get there.

Where have I seen that look before? wondered Homer Wells.
Nurse Angela or Nurse Edna, or even Mrs. Grogan, could have reminded

him; they were all familiar with that look—that strained combination of
exhaustion and expectation, that fierce contradiction between grim anxiety
and childlike faith. For years that look had penetrated even the most innocent
expressions of Wilbur Larch; lately, Nurse Angela and Nurse Edna, and even
Mrs. Grogan, had recognized the look in their own expressions.

“What are we waiting for?” Nurse Edna asked Nurse Angela one morning.

There was an aura of something pending, some form of inevitable change.
These good women were as insulted by the now-famous Goodhall-Gingrich
questionnaire as they felt sure Dr. Larch had been; Larch did seem unusually
cheered by the remarks of the former Snowy Meadows; the board had thought
Snowy’s response was so praiseworthy that they’d sent it along for Dr. Larch
to see.

and the nurses never let him out of their sight. To the question regarding
whether or not the medical attention was “adequate,” Snowy Meadows
advised the board to “just ask Fuzzy Stone.” In Snowy’s opinion, Dr. Larch
had breathed for Fuzzy. “You never heard a worse set of lungs,” said Snowy

Meadows, “but old Larch just hooked the kid up to a real life-saver.” And to
the question of whether or not the foster home was “carefully and correctly
chosen,” Snowy Meadows claimed that Dr. Larch was a genius at this delicate
guesswork. “How could the guy have known that I was going to fit right in
with a furniture family? Well, I’m telling you, he did know,” Snowy
Meadows (now Robert Marsh) wrote to the board. “You know, private
property, the world of personal possessions—that doesn’t mean the world to
everybody. But let me tell you,” Snowy Meadows said, “furniture means the
world to an orphan.”

Nurse Edna and to Nurse Angela, although they could tell he was very
pleased by Snowy’s remarks.

But just to be fair, the board sent Larch Curly Day’s slightly less enthusiastic

response to the questionnaire. Roy Rinfret of Boothbay was seething with
resentment. “I was no more prepared to be adopted by druggists than I was
prepared to have my belly-cord cut,” wrote Roy “Curly” Rinfret. “The most
beautiful couple in the world walked off with someone who didn’t even need
or want to be adopted, and I got nabbed by druggists!” Curly complained.
“You call it being supervised when little children are stumbling over dead
bodies?” Curly Day asked the board. “Imagine this: on the day I find a dead
man in the grass, the couple of my dreams adopts someone else, Dr. Larch
tells me that an orphanage is not a pet store, and shortly thereafter, two
druggists hire me to work in their drugstore for free—and you call that being
adopted!”

“Why, that ungrateful little snot!” said Nurse Angela.
“Why, Curly Day, aren’t you ashamed?” Nurse Edna asked the indifferent

air.

would!”

wondered.

Speaking of “ungrateful,” thought Wilbur Larch, although he held his

tongue.

would have irritated Dr. Larch if he’d known. Nurse Angela came right to the
point. “That questionnaire is the least you can do,” she wrote Homer. “We all
could use a little support. Just because you’re having the time of your life (I
suppose), don’t you dare forget how to be of use—don’t you forget where you
belong. And if you happen to run into any young doctors or nurses who
would be sympathetic to our situation, I think you know that you’d better

recommend us to them—and them to us. We’re not getting any younger, you
know.”

My dear Homer [wrote Dr. Larch, in the next day’s mail],

It’s come to my attention that the board of trustees is attempting to
communicate with several former residents of St. Cloud’s in the form of a
ridiculous questionnaire. Answer it as you see fit, but please do answer it.
And you must be prepared for some other, more troubling correspondence
from them. It was necessary for me to be frank with them regarding the
health of the orphans. Although I saw no reason to tell them I had “lost”
Fuzzy Stone to a respiratory ailment—what good would that admission do
Fuzzy?—I did tell the board about your heart. I felt that if anything ever
happened to me, there should be someone who knew. I do apologize for not
telling you about your condition. I am telling you now because,
reconsidering the matter, I would never want you to hear about your heart
from someone else first. Now, DON’T BE ALARMED! I would not even
describe your heart as a condition, the condition is so slight: you had a fairly
substantial heart murmur as a small child, but this had almost entirely
disappeared when I last checked you—in your sleep; you wouldn’t
remember—and I have delayed even mentioning your heart to you for fear
of worrying you needlessly. (Such worrying might aggravate the condition.)
You have (or had) a pulmonary valve stenosis, but PLEASE DON’T
WORRY! It is nothing, or next to nothing. If you’re interested in more
details, I can provide them. For now, I just didn’t want you being upset by
some fool thing you might hear from that fool board of trustees. Aside from
avoiding any situation of extreme stress or extreme exertion, I want you to
know that you can almost certainly lead a normal life.

A normal life? thought Homer Wells. I am a Bedouin with a heart condition

and Dr. Larch is telling me I can lead a normal life? I am in love with my best
—and only—friend’s girlfriend, but is that what Larch would call “extreme
stress”? And what was Melony to me if not “extreme exertion”?

Whenever Homer Wells thought of Melony (which was not often), he

missed her; then he was angry at himself. Why should I miss her? he
wondered. He tried not to think about St. Cloud’s; the longer he stayed away,
the more extreme life there appeared to him—yet when he thought of it, he
missed it, too. And Nurse Angela and Nurse Edna and Mrs. Grogan and Dr.
Larch, he missed them all. He was angry at himself for that, too; there were
absolutely no signals from his heart to tell him that the life at St. Cloud’s was
the life he wanted.

When she went back to Camden, he tried not to think about her; and since he
could not think of Wally without thinking of Candy, he was relieved when
Wally went back to Orono—although he had missed Wally all that fall.

telling lies. A lie is at least a vigorous enterprise, it keeps you on your toes by
making you suddenly responsible for what happens because of it. You must
be alert to lie, and stay alert to keep your lie a secret. Orphans are not the
masters of their fates; they are the last to believe you if you tell them that
other people are also not in charge of theirs.

“When you lie, it makes you feel in charge of your life. Telling lies is very

seductive to orphans. I know,” Dr. Larch wrote. “I know because I tell them,
too. I love to lie. When you lie, you feel as if you have cheated fate—your
own, and everybody else’s.”

to St. Cloud’s. He mentioned the “restoration” of the abandoned buildings of
St. Cloud’s as one of the many attempts made “to integrate the daily life of
the orphanage with the life of the surrounding community.” He also lied to
Nurse Angela, but it was just a little lie—one of those that are intended to
make other people feel better. He wrote to her that he had lost the original
questionnaire—which was the only reason he had been so tardy in returning
it. Perhaps the board would be kind enough to send him another? (When he
received the second questionnaire from the board, he would know it was time
to send the one he had so arduously filled out—that way he would appear to
have filled it out spontaneously, off the top of his head.)

details regarding his pulmonary valve stenosis. Did Dr. Larch think it
necessary, for example, for Homer to have monthly checkups? (Dr. Larch
would think it unnecessary, of course.) And were there signs of trouble that
Homer himself might detect; were there ways that he could listen for his
perhaps-returning murmur? (Calm yourself, Dr. Larch would advise; that was
the best thing—staying calm.)

he did not fill out—to the wall of Wally’s room, right by the light switch, so
that the questions regarding life at St. Cloud’s occupied a position of ignored
authority quite similar to the page of rules that were yearly tacked up in the
cider house. As Homer came and went, he regarded those questions he had
answered with such able lies—for example, it was quite a kick for him to
contemplate “any possible improvements in the methods and management of
St. Cloud’s” each time he entered and left Wally’s room.

At night, now, Homer’s insomnia kept time to a new music; the winter

branches of the picked apple trees rattling against each other in the early
December wind made a brittle click-clack sound. Lying in his bed—a
moonlight the color of bone starkly outlining his hands folded on his chest—
Homer Wells thought the trees might be trying to shake the snow off their
branches, in advance of the snow itself.

didn’t think about it. She had heard the orchard’s winter rattle for many years;
she had seen the winter branches bare, then lacy with snow, and then bare
again. The coastal winds gave the brittle orchard such a shaking that the
clashing trees resembled frozen soldiers in all the postures of saber-rattling,
but Olive had heard so many years of this season that she never knew a war
was coming. If the trees seemed especially naked to her that December, she
thought it was because she faced her first winter without Senior.

A Brief History of St. Cloud’s, “but an orphan is always looking for signs.”

future—his own, mainly, but Candy’s too, and Wally’s. Dr. Larch’s future was
certainly out there, in those winter branches—even Melony’s future. And
what future would there be for the Lord’s work? wondered Homer Wells.

The war that was about to be did not announce itself in signs at St. Cloud’s;
both the familiar and the unfamiliar were muted there by ritual and by
custom. A pregnancy terminated in a birth or in an abortion; an orphan was
adopted or was waiting to be adopted. When there was a dry and snowless
cold, the loose sawdust irritated the eyes and the noses and the throats of St.
Cloud’s; only briefly, when the snow lay newly fallen, was the sawdust gone
from the air. When there was a thaw, the snow melted down and the matted
sawdust smelled like wet fur; when there was a freeze, the sawdust
reappeared—dry again, somehow on top of the old snow—and again the eyes
itched, the noses ran, and the throats could never quite clear themselves of it.

“Let us be happy for Smoky Fields,” Dr. Larch announced in the boys’

division. “Smoky Fields has found a family. Good night, Smoky.”

“Good night, Thmoky!” said David Copperfield.
“G’night!” young Steerforth cried.
Good night, you little food hoarder, Nurse Angela thought. Whoever took

him, she knew, would soon learn to lock the refrigerator.

In the December morning, at the window where Melony once allowed the

world to pass both with and without comment, Mary Agnes Cork watched the
women walking uphill from the train station. They don’t look pregnant, Mary

Agnes thought.

young Copperfield attempted to steer a cardboard carton through the first, wet
snow. The carton had once contained four hundred sterile vulval pads;
Copperfield knew this because he had unpacked the carton—and he had
placed young Steerforth in the carton, at the bottom of the hill. Near the top,
he was beginning to realize his mistake. Not only had dragging Steerforth
uphill been difficult, but also the boy’s weight—in addition to the wetness of
the snow—had turned the bottom of the carton soggy. Copperfield wondered
if his make-do sled would even slide—if he ever managed to get the mess to
the top.

“Good night, Smoky!” Steerforth was singing.
“Thut up, thupid,” David Copperfield said.
Dr. Larch was very tired. He was resting in the dispensary. The gray, winter

light turned the white walls gray and for a moment Larch wondered what time
of day it was—and what time of year. From now on, he was thinking, let
everything I do be for a reason. Let me make no wasted moves.

allowed him a perfect view of the cervix. Whose cervix? he wondered. Even
in his ether sleep the thumb and index finger of his right hand tightened the
screw that held the jaws of the speculum in place, and he saw the astonishing
blondness of the little clump of pubic hair caught in the hairs of his own wrist.
It was so blond he had nearly missed seeing it against his own pale skin.
When he shook his wrist, the little clump was so light that it floated in the air.
In his ether swoon his left hand reached for it, just missing it. Oh yes—her
cervix, thought Wilbur Larch. What was her name?

laughed. Nurse Edna, passing the dispensary, held her breath and listened to
the laughter. But even when she didn’t breathe, the fumes made her old eyes
water. That and the sawdust. That and the orphans—some of them made her
eyes water, too.

She opened the door at the hospital entrance to let some fresh air into the

hall. On the hill she watched a cardboard carton make an unsteady descent;
she knew that sterile vulval pads had been in the carton, but she wasn’t sure
what was in the carton now. Something heavy, because the carton’s descent
was clumsy and irregular. At times it picked up speed, sliding almost
smoothly, but always some rock or bare patch in the slushy snow would jar it
off-course and slow it down. The first small body to roll out of the carton and
make its way downhill was Steerforth’s; she recognized his overlarge mittens
and the ski hat that always covered his eyes. For a while he tumbled almost as

fast as the carton, but a large patch of bare, frozen ground finally stopped him.
Nurse Edna watched him climb back uphill for one of his mittens.

David Copperfield’s; he rolled free with a large, soggy piece of the carton in
both his hands. The carton appeared to disintegrate in flight.

“Thit!” Copperfield cried. At least, Nurse Edna thought, young

Copperfield’s profanities were improved by his lisp.

“Close that door,” said Dr. Larch, in the hall behind Nurse Edna.
“I was just trying to get some fresh air,” Nurse Edna said pointedly.
“You could have fooled me,” said Wilbur Larch. “I thought you were trying

to freeze the unborn.”

what future ways there would be.

In the December swimming pool the raft that Senior Worthington used to ride
still floated, windblown from one end of the pool to the other, breaking up the
lacy fringes of ice that formed and reformed around the edges. Olive and
Homer had drained out a third of the pool’s water, to leave room for rainfall
and snow melt.

Senior’s cold raft, only partially deflated by the falling temperature, still

charged around the swimming pool like a riderless horse; it galloped
wherever the wind urged it. Every day Olive watched the raft out the kitchen
window, and Homer wondered when she would suggest getting rid of it.

One weekend Candy came home from Camden, and Homer’s confusion

regarding what he should do about her mounted. Friday was a bad, indecisive
day. He went early to Senior Biology, hoping to persuade Mr. Hood either to
let him have his own rabbit for dissection or to assign him a lab partner other
than that boy Bucky. Bucky managed to mangle the rabbit’s innards whenever
he handled them, and Homer found the oaf’s constant fixation with
everything’s reproductive system both silly and maddening. Bucky had lately
seized on the fact that marsupials have paired vaginas.

“Twin twats! Can you believe it?” Bucky asked Homer.
“Right,” said Homer Wells.
“Is that all you can say?” Bucky asked. “Don’t you get it? If you was a

hamster, you could fuck another hamster with your buddy!”

“Why would I want to do that?” Homer asked.
“Two cunts!” Bucky said enthusiastically. “You got no imagination.”
“I doubt that even the hamsters are interested in what you suggest,” said

Homer Wells.

“That’s what I mean, stupid,” Bucky said. “What a waste—to give two twats

to a hamster! You ever seen ’em run on them little wheels? They’re crazy!
Wouldn’t you be crazy if you knew the girl of your dreams had two twats and
she still wasn’t interested?”

“The girl of my dreams,” said Homer Wells.
It was crazy enough, in Homer’s opinion, that the girl of his dreams had two

people who loved her.

replacement for the obsessed boy named Bucky.

class was released, Homer saw that the large maps of the world were still
pulled down, covering the blackboard. “May I just look at the maps for a
moment, before my next class?” Homer asked the geography teacher. “I’ll roll
them back up for you.”

whole world, albeit unrealistically flat against a blackboard. After a while he
found Maine; he regarded how small it was. After a while he found South
Carolina; he stared into South Carolina for a long time, as if the exact
whereabouts of Mr. Rose and the other migrants would materialize. He had
heard all the talk about Germany, which was easier to find than Maine. He
was surprised at the size of England; Charles Dickens had given him the
impression of something much bigger.

And the ocean that seemed so vast when you looked at it off Ray Kendall’s

dock—why the oceans of the world were even more vast than he’d imagined.
Yet St. Cloud’s, which loomed so large in Homer’s life, could not be located
on the map of Maine. He was using the geography teacher’s magnifying glass
when he suddenly realized that the entire class of Senior Biology had filled
the seats behind him. Mr. Hood was regarding him strangely.

joke enormously, and Homer realized he had—at least for that day—lost the
opportunity to rid himself of Bucky.

Debra Pettigrew had two twats, she might let you in one of them. You see the
advantages?”

Friday evening date with Debra Pettigrew. There was a Fred Astaire movie in
Bath, but that was almost an hour-long drive, each way, and what did Homer
Wells know or care about dancing? He had declined several invitations to
attend Debra’s dancing class with her; if she wanted to see the Fred Astaire
movie, Homer thought she could go with someone who was in her dancing
class. And it was getting too cold simply to drive down to the beach and park

there. Olive was generous about letting Homer use the van. Soon there would
be gas rationing, and a welcome end, in Homer’s opinion, to all this restless
driving.

moonlight, the abandoned, unlighted Ferris wheel stood out like scaffolding
for the world’s first rocket launch, or like the bones of some species from
dinosaur times. Homer tried to tell Debra about the knife work of Mr. Rose,
but she had her heart set on Fred Astaire; he knew better than to waste a good
story on her when she was sulking. They drove to the Cape Kenneth drive-in,
which was “closed for the season”; they appeared to be reviewing the scenes
of a romance that had happened to other people—and not just last summer,
but to another generation.

“I don’t know what you’ve got against dancing,” Debra said.
“I don’t know, either,” said Homer Wells.
It was still early when he drove Debra to her winter home in Kenneth

Corners; the same ferocious dogs of the summer were there, with their coats
grown thicker, with their hot breath icing on their muzzles. There had been
talk between Debra and Homer, earlier, about using the summer house on
Drinkwater Lake for some kind of party; the house would be unheated, and
they would have to keep the lights off, or someone might report a breaking
and entering; but despite these discomforts, surely there was a thrill in being
unchaperoned. Why? wondered Homer Wells. He knew he still wouldn’t get
to Debra Pettigrew—even if she had two vaginas. With the dull Friday
evening they had spent together, and with the dogs’ breath crystallizing on the
driver’s-side window of the van, there was no talk about such a tempting
party this night.

“So what are we doing tomorrow night?” Debra asked, sighing.
Homer watched a dog gnaw at his side-view mirror.
“Well, I was going to see Candy—she’s home from Camden,” Homer said.

“I haven’t seen her on a weekend all fall, and Wally did ask me to look after
her.”

“You’re going to see her without Wally?” Debra asked.
“Right,” Homer said. The van was so snub-nosed that the dogs could hurl

themselves directly against the windshield without having to clamber over the
hood. A big dog’s paws raked one of the windshield wipers away from the
windshield, releasing it with a crack; it looked bent; it wouldn’t quite touch
the surface of the glass anymore.

“You’re going to see her alone,” Debra said.
“Or with her dad,” Homer said.
“Sure,” said Debra Pettigrew, getting out of the van. She left the door open a

little too long. A dog with the spade-shaped head of a Doberman charged the
open door; it was half in the van, its heavy chest heaving against the
passenger-side seat, its frosty muzzle drooling on the gearshift box, when
Debra grabbed it by the ear and yanked it back, yelping, out of the van.

had wiped the dog’s frothy slobber off the gearshift knob.

him whether Candy was home. On the weekends when she came home, she
took the train; then Ray drove her back, on Sunday. I’ll call her tomorrow—
Saturday—Homer thought.

no objections. “I always wanted to see him,” he said. Bath, after all, was less
than an hour away.

the water and several more in dry dock; the Bath shipyards were sprawled
along the shore—a rhythmic hammering and other metal sounds audible even
on a Saturday. They were much too early for the movie. They were looking
for an Italian restaurant that Ray had told them about—if it was still there;
Raymond Kendall hadn’t been in Bath in years.

In 194_, especially to an outsider, the city seemed dominated by the

shipyards, and by the ships that stood taller than the shipyard buildings, and
by the bridge that spanned the Kennebec River. Bath was a workingman’s
town, as Melony soon discovered.

assembly line, working with other women—and with an occasional,
handicapped man—on the second floor of a factory specializing in movable
parts. The movable part to which Melony would devote her energies for the
first month of her employment was a hexagonal-shaped sprocket that looked
like half a ham, split open lengthwise; Melony did not know the whereabouts
of the assembly line that dealt with the other half of the ham. The sprocket
arrived on the conveyor belt in front of her, pausing there for exactly forty-
five seconds before it was moved on and replaced by a new sprocket. The
joint of the sprocket was packed with grease; you could stick your finger in
the grease, past the second knuckle. The job was to insert six ball bearings
into the grease-packed joint; you pushed each ball bearing into the grease
until you felt it hit the bottom; all six fit perfectly. The trick was to get only
one hand greasy; a clean hand had an easier time handling the clean ball
bearings, which were the size of marbles. The other part of the job was
making sure that the six ball bearings were perfect—perfectly round, perfectly
smooth; no dents, no jagged metal scraps stuck to them. The odds were that

one out of every two hundred ball bearings had something wrong with it; at
the end of the day, you turned in the bad ball bearings. If you had a day with
no bad ball bearings, the foreman told you that you weren’t looking each ball
bearing over carefully enough.

through the day. The belt was too high to make sitting comfortable and too
low to make standing any better. Your back hurt in one place when you stood
and in another place when you sat. Not only did Melony not know who did
what, where, to the other half of the sprocket; she also didn’t know what the
sprocket was for. What’s more, she didn’t care.

twenty-eight seconds to insert the ball bearings and never more than ten
seconds to pick six perfect ball bearings. She learned to keep a nest of ball
bearings in her lap (when she sat) and in an ashtray (she didn’t smoke) when
she stood; that way she always had a ball bearing handy in case she dropped
one. She had a twelve-to-fourteen-second rest between sprockets, during
which time she could look at the person on her left and at the person on her
right, and shut her eyes and count to three or sometimes five. She observed
that there were two styles of labor on the line. Some of the workers picked
their six perfect ball bearings immediately upon finishing a sprocket; the
others waited for the new sprocket to arrive first. Melony found faults with
both styles.

are stickers,” she said.

“I’m not either, or I’m both,” Melony said.
“Well, I think you’ll have an easier time of it, dearie, if you make up your

mind,” the woman said. Her name was Doris. She had three children; one side
of her face was still pretty, but the other was marred by a mole with whiskers
in it. In the twelve or fourteen seconds that Doris had between sprockets, she
smoked.

On the other side of Melony was an elderly man in a wheelchair. His

problem was that he could not pick up the ball bearings that he dropped, and
some of them got caught in his lap blanket or in the wheelchair apparatus,
which caused him to rattle when he wheeled himself off for his coffee break
or for lunch. His name was Walter.

Three or four times a day, Walter would shout, “Fucking ball bearings!”
Some days, when someone was sick, the assembly line was reassembled and

Melony was not pinned between Walter and Doris. Sometimes she got to be
next to Troy, who was blind. He felt the ball bearings for perfection and
daintily poked them into the thick and unseen grease. He was a little older

than Melony, but he had always worked in the shipyards; he’d been blinded in
a welding accident, and the shipyards owed him a job for life.

“At least I’ve got security,” he would say, three or four times a day.
Some days Melony was put next to a girl about her age, a feisty little chick

called Lorna.

“There’s worse jobs,” Lorna said one day.
“Name one,” said Melony.
“Blowing bulldogs,” Lorna said.
“I don’t know about that,” Melony said. “I’ll bet every bulldog is different.”
“Then how come every man is the same?” Lorna asked. Melony decided

that she liked Lorna.

said—but it hadn’t worked out. He was a garage mechanic, “about twenty-
one,” Lorna said. “He just married me ’cause I was the first person he slept
with,” Lorna told Melony.

girl who came between us”; Lorna agreed that this was “the worst.”

“But I figure one of two things has happened,” Melony said. “Either he still

hasn’t fucked her, because she hasn’t let him, and so he’s figured out what
he’s missing. Or else she’s let him fuck her—in which case, he’s figured out
what he’s missing.”

“Ha! That’s right,” Lorna said. She appeared to like Melony.
“I got some friends,” she told Melony. “We eat pizza, go to movies, you

know.” Melony nodded; she had done none of those things. Lorna was as thin
as Melony was thick, she showed as much bone as Melony showed flesh;
Lorna was pale and blond, whereas Melony was dark and darker; Lorna
looked frail and she coughed a lot, whereas Melony looked almost as strong
as she was and her lungs were a set of engines. Yet the women felt they
belonged together.

When they requested that they be put next to each other on the assembly

line, their request was denied. Friendships, especially talkative ones, were
considered counterproductive on the line. Thus Melony was allowed to work
alongside Lorna only when the line was reassembled on a sick day. Melony
was made to endure the crackpot homilies of Doris and the lost ball bearings
of Wheelchair Walter, as everyone called him. But the enforced separation
from Lorna on the work line only made Melony feel stronger in her
attachment; the attachment was mutual. That Saturday they put in for
overtime together, and they worked side by side through the afternoon.

over the Kennebec and driving into downtown Bath, Lorna dropped a ball

bearing down the cleavage of Melony’s work shirt. It was their way of getting
each other’s attention.

gum. “You wanna see it?”

Although her voice lacked the studied heartiness of Dr. Larch’s, Mrs. Grogan
did her best to inspire a welcome response to her announcement to the girls’
division. “Let us be happy for Mary Agnes Cork,” she said; there was general
sniveling, but Mrs. Grogan pressed on. “Mary Agnes Cork has found a
family. Good night, Mary Agnes!”

There were stifled moans, the sound of someone gagging in her pillow, and

a few of the usual, wracking sobs.

“Let us be happy for Mary Agnes Cork!” Mrs. Grogan pleaded.
“Fuck you,” someone said in the darkness.
“It hurts me to hear you say that,” Mrs. Grogan said. “How that hurts us all.

Good night, Mary Agnes!” Mrs. Grogan called.

“Good night, Mary Agnes,” one of the smaller ones said.
“Be careful, Mary Agnes!” someone blubbered.
Goodness, yes! thought Mrs. Grogan, the tears running down her cheeks.

Yes, be careful.

Larch had assured Mrs. Grogan that the adoptive family was especially good

for an older girl like Mary Agnes. They were a young couple who bought and
sold and restored antiques; they were too active in their business to look after
a small child, but they had lots of energy to share with an older child on the
weekends and in the evenings. The young wife had been very close to a kid
sister; she was “devoted to girl talk,” she told Dr. Larch. (Apparently, the kid
sister had married a foreigner and was now living abroad.)

And Wilbur Larch had a good feeling for Bath; he’d always maintained a

friendly correspondence with the pathologist at Bath Hospital; good old Clara
had come from there. And so it seemed perfectly fine to him that Mary Agnes
Cork had gone to Bath.

Mary Agnes was attached to her own name, and so they allowed her to keep

it, not just the Mary Agnes but the Cork, too. After all, they were Callahans; a
Cork went with a Callahan, didn’t it? It sounded a little modern for Mrs.
Grogan’s tastes, although she allowed herself to be pleased at the thought that
she’d named someone for keeps.

Ted and Patty Callahan wanted Mary Agnes Cork to view them as friends.

The first friendly thing the young couple did was to take Mary Agnes to her
first movie. They were a robust couple, and in their opinion they lived near
enough to the movie theater in Bath to walk; it was a long walk, during which

Ted and Patty demonstrated some of the basic differences between a fox-trot
and a waltz. The December sidewalk was sloppy, but Ted and Patty wanted to
prepare Mary Agnes for some of the dazzle of Fred Astaire.

her collarbone ache; when she tried to join the Callahans at dancing, the old
injury felt loose; then it throbbed; then it grew numb. The sidewalk was so
slippery, she nearly fell—catching her balance on the fender of a dirty green
van. Patty brushed her coat off for her. People were outside the movie house,
buying tickets in the failing light. On the sliding panel door of the van, Mary
Agnes Cork recognized the apple monogram—the W.W., and the OCEAN
VIEW. She had first seen this emblem on a Cadillac—there had been a kind
of hunger line; she remembered that beautiful girl standing aloof and that
beautiful boy passing out the food. They’re here! Mary Agnes thought, the
beautiful people who took Homer Wells away! Maybe Homer was still with
them. Mary Agnes began to look around.

Ray had recommended; they’d found two or three Italian restaurants, each
one serving pizza and submarine sandwiches and beer, and each one so
overrun with workers from the shipyards that there was no place to sit.
They’d eaten some pizza in the van and had arrived at the movie early.

realized that he’d never opened his wallet outdoors—in a winter wind—
before. He put his back to the wind, but still the loose bills flapped; Candy
cupped her hands on either side of his wallet, as if she were protecting a flame
in danger of going out, and that was how she was in a position to catch her
own, treasured clump of pubic hair when it blew free from Homer’s wallet
and caught on the cuff of her coat. They both grabbed for it (Homer letting the
wallet fall), but Candy was quicker. Some of the fine, blond hairs may have
escaped in the wind, but Candy seized the clump tightly—Homer’s hand
closing immediately on hers.

past them. Candy continued to hold her pubic hair tightly, and Homer would
not let her hand go—he would not let her open her hand to examine what she
held; there was no need for that. Candy knew what she held in her hand; she
knew it as much from Homer’s expression as from the clump of pubic hair
itself.

“I’d like to take a walk,” she whispered.
“Right,” said Homer Wells, not letting go of her hand. They turned away

from the theater and walked downhill to the Kennebec. Candy faced the river
and leaned against Homer Wells.

“Perhaps you’re a collector,” she said, as quietly as she could speak and still

be heard over the river. “Perhaps you’re a pubic hair collector,” she said. “You
certainly were in a position to be.”

“No,” he said.
“This is pubic hair,” she said, wriggling her tightly clenched fist in his hand.

“And it’s mine, right?”

“Right,” said Homer Wells.
“Only mine?” Candy asked. “You kept only mine?”
“Right,” Homer said.
“Why?” Candy asked. “Don’t lie.”
He had never said the words: I am in love with you. He was unprepared for

the struggle involved in saying them. No doubt he misunderstood the
unfamiliar weight he felt upon his heart—he must have associated the
constriction of that big muscle in his chest with Dr. Larch’s recent news; what
he felt was only love, but what he thought he felt was his pulmonary valve
stenosis. He let go of Candy’s hand and put both his hands to his chest. He
had seen the sternum shears at work—he knew the autopsy procedure—but
never had it been so hard and painful to breathe.

hands opened and grasped his hands, the blond wisp of pubic hair flying free;
a current of rough air carried it out over the river and into the darkness.

“Is it your heart?” Candy asked him. “Oh God, you don’t have to say

anything—please don’t even think about it!”

“My heart,” he said. “You know about my heart?”
“You know?” she asked. “Don’t worry!” she added fiercely.
“I love you,” Homer Wells croaked, as if he were saying his last words.
“Yes, I know—don’t think about it,” Candy said. “Don’t worry about

anything. I love you, too.”

“You do?” he asked.
“Yes, yes, and Wally too,” she said. “I love you and I love Wally—but don’t

worry about it, don’t even think about it.”

“How do you know about my heart?” asked Homer Wells.
“We all know about it,” Candy said. “Olive knows, and Wally knows.”
Hearing this was more convincing to Homer Wells than even the offhand

remarks in Dr. Larch’s letter; he felt his heart race out of control again.

“Don’t worry about me, or Wally—or any of it.”

“What am I supposed to think about?” asked Homer Wells.
“Only good things,” Candy told him. When she looked into his eyes, she

intensity of his frown, she said, “I mean, it’s okay—I understand, I guess.
Don’t worry about it, either. It may be peculiar, but it’s certainly romantic.”

holding her. To touch her more would surely be forbidden—by all the rules—
and so he tried to accept the ache in his heart as what Dr. Larch would call the
common symptoms of a normal life. This is a normal life, he tried to think,
holding Candy as both the night fog off the river and the darkness reached
over them.

It was not a night that put them in the mood for a musical.
“We can see Fred Astaire dance another time,” Candy said philosophically.
The safety of the familiar drew them toward Raymond Kendall’s dock—

when they got cold, sitting out there, they could always have some tea with
Ray. They drove the van back to Heart’s Haven; nobody who knew them saw
them come or go.

In the Fred Astaire movie, Mary Agnes Cork ate too much popcorn; her

foster family thought that the poor girl was simply overstimulated by her first
movie; she could not sit still. She watched the audience more than she
watched the dancing; she searched every face in the flickering darkness. It
was that pretty girl and that pretty boy she was looking for—and maybe
Homer Wells. And so she was unprepared to spot the face in the crowd of the
one person she missed most in her narrow world; the sight of that dark, heavy
countenance shot such a stab of pain through her old collarbone injury that the
popcorn container flew from her hands.

Melony loomed over the sassy blond girl named Lorna—hulking in her seat

with the authority of a chronic and cynical moviegoer, looking like a sour
critic born to be displeased, although this was her first movie. Even in the
projector’s gray light, Mary Agnes Cork could not fail to recognize her old
brutalizer, the ex-queen and former hit-woman of the girls’ division.

“I think you’ve had enough of that popcorn, sweetheart,” Patty Callahan told

Mary Agnes, who appeared to have a kernel of the stuff caught in her throat.
And for the rest of the evening’s frivolous entertainment, Mary Agnes could
not keep her eyes off that most dominant member of the audience; in Mary
Agnes Cork’s opinion, Melony could have wiped up a dance floor with Fred
Astaire, she could have broken every bone in Fred’s slender body—she could
have paralyzed him after just one waltz.

“Do you see someone you know, dear?” Ted Callahan asked Mary Agnes.

He thought the poor girl was so stuffed with popcorn that she couldn’t talk.

a dream led her feet—as if she were captured in the old, violent trance of
Melony’s authority.

“Hi,” she said.
“You talking to me, kid?” Lorna asked, but Mary Agnes was smiling just at

Melony.

“Hi, it’s me!” Mary Agnes said.
“So you got out?” Melony said.
“I’ve been adopted!” said Mary Agnes Cork. Ted and Patty stood a little

nervously near her, not wanting to intrude but not wanting to let her very far
from their sight, either. “This is Ted and Patty,” Mary Agnes said. “This is my
friend, Melony.”

The tough little broad named Lorna batted her eyes—some of her mascara
sticking one of her eyelids in a frozen-open position.

“This is my friend, Lorna,” Melony said awkwardly.
Everyone said Hi! and then stood around. What does the little creep want?

Melony was thinking.

And that was when Mary Agnes said, “Where’s Homer?”
“What?” Melony said.
“Homer Wells,” said Mary Agnes. “Isn’t he with you?”
“Why?” Melony asked.
“Those pretty people with the car . . .” Mary Agnes began.
“What car?” Melony asked.
“Well, it wasn’t the same car, it wasn’t the pretty car, but there was the apple

on the door—I’ll never forget that apple,” Mary Agnes said.

felt the weight pressing her into the floor. “What are you talking about?”
Melony asked.

they was at the movie, those pretty people—and Homer, too. And when I saw
you, I thought he would be here for sure.”

“Where was the car?” Melony asked, her strong thumbs bearing down on

both of Mary Agnes’s collarbones. “Show me the car!”

“Is something wrong?” Ted Callahan asked.
“Mind your own business,” Melony said.
But the van was gone. In the damp cold, on the slushy sidewalk, staring at

the empty curbstone, Melony said, “Are you sure it was that apple? It had a
double W, and it said Ocean View.”

“That’s it,” Mary Agnes said. “It just wasn’t the same car, it was an old van,

but I’d know that apple anywhere. You don’t forget a thing like that.”

guesses in the air for the history of intrusions upon its territory.

“What is it?” Lorna asked Melony. “Was your fella here with his rich cunt?”
Ted and Patty Callahan were anxious to take Mary Agnes home, but Melony

stopped them as they were leaving. She reached into her tight pocket and
produced the horn-rimmed barrette that Mary Agnes had stolen from Candy,
which Melony had taken for herself. Melony gave the barrette to Mary Agnes.

“Keep it,” Melony said. “You took it, it’s yours.”
Mary Agnes clutched the barrette as if it were a medal for bravery, for

valorous conduct in the only arena that Melony respected.

—the escaping Homer Wells might be around the next corner.

“What color was the van?” Melony called.
“Green!” said Mary Agnes. “I hope I see ya!” she repeated.
“You ever hear of an Ocean View?” Melony yelled back at the Callahans;

they hadn’t. What are apples to antiques dealers?

“Can I see ya sometime?” Mary Agnes asked Melony.
“I’m at the shipyards,” Melony told the girl. “If you ever hear of an Ocean

View, you can see me.”

“You don’t know it was him,” Lorna said to Melony later. They were

drinking beer. Melony wasn’t talking. “And you don’t know if the rich cunt is
still with him.”

They stood on the bank of the foggy Kennebec, near the boardinghouse

where Lorna lived; when they’d finish a beer, they’d throw the bottle into the
river. Melony was good at throwing things into rivers. She kept her face
turned up; she was still smelling the wind—as if even that wisp of Candy’s
pubic hair could not escape her powers of detection.

he threw off Ray Kendall’s dock; the sea made just the smallest sound in
swallowing snails. Ploink! Ploink!

end of the dock. If they’d both stretched out their legs to each other, the soles
of their feet could have touched, but Candy sat with her knees slightly bent—
in a position familiar to Homer Wells from his many views of women in
stirrups.

“Is it okay?” Candy asked quietly.
“Is what okay?” he asked.
“Your heart,” she whispered.
How could he tell? “I guess so,” he said.
“It’ll be okay,” she said.
“What will be okay?” asked Homer Wells.

“Everything,” Candy said hurriedly.
“Everything,” repeated Homer Wells. “Me loving you—that’s okay. And

you loving me, and Wally—that’s okay, too? Right,” he said.

“You have to wait and see,” Candy said. “For everything—you have to wait

and see.”

“Right.”
“I don’t know what to do, either,” said Candy helplessly.
“We have to do the right thing,” Homer Wells said. Wally would want to do

the right thing, and Dr. Larch was doing what he thought was the right thing,
too. If you could be patient enough to wait and see, the right thing must
present itself—mustn’t it? What else does an orphan do, anyway, but wait and
see?

“I can be patient,” said Homer Wells.
Melony could be patient, too. And Ray Kendall, at his window above his

dock—he could be patient, too. A mechanic is also patient; a mechanic has to
wait for something to break before he can fix it. Ray stared at the distance
between his daughter’s feet and the feet of Homer Wells; it was not much of a
distance, and he had observed his daughter on his dock many times in Wally’s
arms, and, before that, when Candy and Wally had also sat on that dock with
their feet not touching.

knew better than to interfere. When it breaks, then he would fix it; he felt
sorry for them all.

“I can drive you back to school tomorrow,” Homer said.
“My dad can drive me back,” Candy said. “I think he likes to.”
Olive Worthington looked at the clock on her night table and turned out her

reading lamp; Homer never stayed out this late with Debra Pettigrew, she was
thinking. Olive had no trouble imagining Candy’s attraction to Homer Wells;
Olive had the greatest respect for Homer’s diligence. She had seen him be a
better student—and of the rabbit, of all things!—than Wally had ever been,
and she knew he was a reliable and friendly companion, too. Olive fumed to
herself. She felt that typical contradiction a parent so often feels: completely
on her son’s side—she even wanted to warn him, to help his cause—but at the
same time Wally could stand to be taught a lesson. Just maybe not this lesson,
Olive thought.

voice in the empty house surprising her and thoroughly waking her up. Some
hot chocolate would be soothing, she thought; and when Homer comes home,
he can have some with me.

cloudy moonlight, made the raft in the swimming pool look quite ghostly. The
raft was poised at the side of the pool, half in the water and half out, like a
very gray and shadowy photograph of itself. The image disturbed her, and
Olive decided she’d had enough of that raft. She put on a pair of boots and a
long winter coat over her nightgown. It bothered her that the outdoor patio
light was not working; only the underwater lights would turn on, and she was
surprised to see that the water in the pool had finally frozen. That was the
reason for the raft’s arrested position. It was trapped as rigidly as a statue, like
a ship seized in an ice floe. Being careful to hold tight to the pool curb, she
kicked tentatively at the ice with the heel of her boot, but when she tugged the
raft, it would not come free. If I walk out there, I’ll fall right through, she
thought.

That was when Homer came home. She heard the van in the driveway and

she called to him.

“What do you want done with it?” Homer asked Olive about the raft.
“Just get it out,” Olive said to him.
“And then what?” he asked.
“Throw it away,” she said. “Meanwhile, I’ll make you some hot chocolate.”
Homer struggled with the raft. The ice, which would not support all his

weight, was hard enough to have a firm grip on the raft. Very cleverly, he
eased himself onto the raft, hoping it still had enough air in it so that it
wouldn’t sink once he broke the bond with the ice. He rocked back and forth
on his knees on the raft until he could feel the ice breaking. Then he rocked
his way through more of the ice and climbed up on the pool curb and pulled
the raft out of the pool after him. Ice still clung to it; it was so heavy, he had
to drag it. When he got to the trash barrels, he needed to deflate the raft in
order to stuff it in a barrel. The nozzle was rusted shut, and even by jumping
with both feet, he couldn’t break the tough canvas hide.

thinner blade, he stabbed a gash in the raft and snipped upward—the stale,
rubbery air blasting into his face. It was moist and fetid, and when he tore the
hole wider, the smell washed over him—strangely warm in the cold night air,
and strangely foul. It was not only the smell of someone’s old sneakers left
out in the rain; there was also something putrid about it and he couldn’t help
viewing the slashed object as he might have viewed a ripped intestine. He
stuffed the raft into a trash barrel, but when he went into the house for his hot-
chocolate reward, the smell remained on his hands even after he had washed
them. He stuck his nose into the hollow in the palm of his hand; the smell was
still there. Then he recognized the smell: it was what was left on his hands
after he removed the rubber gloves.

“How’s Candy?” Olive asked.
“Fine,” said Homer Wells.
They sipped their hot chocolate—like mother and son, both of them were

thinking; and, at the same time, not like mother and son, they both thought.

“And how are you?” Olive asked him, after a while.
“Just fine,” said Homer Wells, but what he thought was: I’m going to wait

and see.

Wilbur Larch, inhaling and seeing the stars race across the ceiling of the
dispensary, knew what a luxury it was: to be able to wait and see. Even if I
last, he thought, I might get caught; an abortionist believes in odds. He had
been in the business too long. What are the odds that someone will blow the
whistle before I’m through? the old man wondered.

Only yesterday he had made a new enemy—a woman in her eighth month

who said it was only her fourth. He had to refuse her. When the women were
hysterical, he usually could wait them out; if they required firmness, he gave
them Nurse Angela; Nurse Edna was better at handholding. In time, they
calmed down. If, in his opinion, a woman was simply too late—if he felt he
had to refuse to perform the abortion—he usually could convince the woman
she would be safe at St. Cloud’s; that he would deliver the baby and find it a
home, and that this was preferable to the risk involved in a late abortion.

But not this woman. There had been no hysterics. The peacefulness of a

long-standing hatred made the woman almost serene.

“So that’s it—you won’t do it,” she said.
“I’m sorry,” Dr. Larch said.
“How much do you want?” the woman asked him. “I can get it.”
“Whatever you can afford to donate to the orphanage would be appreciated,”

Larch said. “If you can’t afford anything, then everything is free. An abortion
is free, delivery is free. A donation is appreciated. If you have nowhere to go,
you’re welcome to stay here. You don’t have long to wait.”

“Just tell me what I have to do,” the woman said. “Do I fuck you? Okay, I’ll

fuck you.”

“I want you to have this baby and let me find it a home,” Wilbur Larch said.

“That’s all I want you to do.”

But the woman had stared right through him. She struggled out of the

overstuffed chair in Nurse Angela’s office. She regarded the paperweight on
Larch’s desk; it was a weighted vaginal speculum, but it held down a lot of
paper and most of the would-be foster families didn’t know what it was. The
woman who wanted the late abortion clearly knew what it was; she stared at it
as if the sight of it gave her cramps. Then she looked out the window, where

(Dr. Larch imagined) she intended to hurl the paperweight.

Larch, as if it were a gun.

“You’ll be sorry,” the woman said.
In his ether haze, Wilbur Larch saw the woman point the speculum at him

again. How will I be sorry? he wondered.

thought, You’re forgiven; I forgive you.

It was Sunday, and overcast—as usual. The same Fred Astaire movie that was
entertaining the residents of Bath was playing in Orono, and the students at
the University of Maine in 194_ were not yet so cynical that they failed to
enjoy it. Wally went to the movie with some of his friends. During the
afternoon matinee, they didn’t interrupt the show with the news that
interrupted the rest of the world. They allowed Fred Astaire to dance on, and
on, and the moviegoers heard the news after the show, when they stepped out
of the comforting dark of the theater into the late-afternoon daylight of
downtown Orono.

Candy was returning to Camden with her father. Raymond Kendall was

especially proud of the radio reception he had engineered for his Chevrolet; it
was much clearer reception than was possible, at the time, in a standard car
radio, and Ray had made the whiplash antenna himself. Candy and her father
heard the news as soon as anyone in Maine heard it, and they heard it loud
and clear.

Olive always had the radio on, and so she was one of those people who

needed to hear things several times before she really heard them at all. She
was baking an apple pie, and simmering applesauce, and only the unusual
urgency in the announcer’s voice caused her to pay attention to the radio at
all.

Homer Wells was in Wally’s room, reading David Copperfield and thinking

about Heaven—“. . . that sky above me, where, in the mystery to come, I
might yet love her with a love unknown on earth, and tell her what the strife
had been within me when I loved her here.” I think I would prefer to love
Candy here, “on earth,” Homer Wells was thinking—when Olive interrupted
him.

“Homer!” Olive called upstairs. “Where is Pearl Harbor?”
He was the wrong person to ask; Homer Wells had seen the whole world

only once, and briefly—and flat against the blackboard. He’d had difficulty
locating South Carolina; not only did he not know where Pearl Harbor was,
he also didn’t know what it was.

“I don’t know!” he called downstairs.
“Well, the Japanese have just bombed it!” Olive called to him.
“You mean, with planes?” asked Homer Wells. “From the sky?”
“Of course from the sky!” Olive shouted. “You better come listen to this.”
“Where is Pearl Harbor?” Candy asked her father.
“Ssshhh!” said Raymond Kendall. “If we just listen, maybe they’ll say.”
“How could they get away with an attack?” Candy asked.
“Because someone wasn’t doing his job,” Ray said.
The first reports were garbled. There was mention of California falling

under attack, or even being invaded. Many listeners were confused from the
beginning; they thought Pearl Harbor was in California.

and listening to the radio, for music, when they’d heard the news.

“Hawaii is in the Pacific,” said Wilbur Larch.
“Oh, that’s very far away,” Nurse Edna said.
“Not far enough away,” Dr. Larch said.
“There’s going to be another war, isn’t there?” Nurse Angela asked.
“I guess it’s already started,” said Wilbur Larch, while Wally—to whom this

war would mean the most—watched Fred Astaire; Fred just kept dancing and
dancing, and Wally thought he could go on watching such a display of grace
for hours.

Melony and Lorna were listening to the radio in the parlor of the

boardinghouse where Lorna lived. It was a women-only boardinghouse; the
women were either quite old or, like Lorna, only recently separated from their
husbands. On this Sunday afternoon, most of the women listening to the radio
were old.

up the whole country.”

the old women, listened intently. “Because they masturbate all the time—both
the men and the women. They just do it all the time.”

There was either a polite or a stunned silence, or both. In Melony’s case, her

silence was polite.

“Is this a joke?” she asked her friend respectfully.
“Of course it’s a joke!” Lorna cried.
“I don’t get it, I guess,” Melony admitted.
“How come Japs got squinty eyes?” Lorna asked. “Because they masturbate

all the time.” She paused.

“That’s what I thought you said,” Melony said.
“Because they shut their eyes every time they come!” Lorna said. “Their

eyes get tired from all that opening and closing. That’s why they can’t open
their eyes all the way! Get it?” Lorna asked triumphantly.

Anyone seeing the old women in the boardinghouse parlor would not have
known exactly what filled them with fear and trembling: the news of the
attack on Pearl Harbor, or Lorna and Melony.

on the streets of Orono, where he heard the news. President Roosevelt would
call it a “day of infamy,” but that day meant more than infamy to Wally,
whose noble and adventurous heart longed to fly a B-24 Liberator: a heavy
bomber, four engines, used for bombing bridges, oil refineries, fuel depots,
railroad tracks, and so forth. Somewhere, on that “day of infamy,” there was a
B-24 Liberator bomber waiting for young Wally Worthington to learn how to
fly it.

everything: money, looks, goodness, charm, the girl of his dreams—but he
had courage, too, and he had in abundance youth’s most dangerous qualities:
optimism and restlessness. He would risk everything he had to fly the plane
that could carry the bomb within him.

Wally enlisted in the Army Air Corps before Christmas, but they allowed him
to spend Christmas at home. It would take the Army Air Corps more than a
year to teach Wally the grim arts of aerial warfare.

“By that time,” he told Olive and Candy in the kitchen at Ocean View, “all

the fighting will probably be over. That would be just my luck.”

“That would be lucky,” Olive said. Candy nodded her head.
“Right!” said Homer Wells, from the other room. He was still thinking about

being excused from his physical; Dr. Larch’s account of Homer’s heart history
had sufficed. Physical examinations were given only to people who were
Class I. Homer Wells was Class IV. According to his family physician, Homer
had congenital pulmonic stenosis; Homer’s “family physician” was Dr. Larch,
whose letter to the local medical advisory board had been accepted as
evidence enough for Homer’s deferment—Larch was also a member of the
local board.

“I asked her to marry me, but she wouldn’t,” Wally told Homer in their

shared bedroom. “She said she’d wait for me, but she wouldn’t marry me. She
said she’d be my wife, but not my widow.”

“Is that what you call waiting and seeing?” Homer asked Candy the next

day.

“Yes,” Candy said. “For years I’ve expected to be married to Wally. You

came along second. I have to wait and see about you. And now comes the
war. I have to wait and see about the war, too.”

“But you made him a promise,” said Homer Wells.
“Yes,” Candy said. “Isn’t a promise like waiting and seeing? Did you ever

make a promise, and mean it—and break it?” Homer Wells’s reaction was an
involuntary cringe, as sudden and uncontrollable as if Candy had called him
“Sunshine.”

said, “I would have chosen submarines.”

“You’d end up feeding lobsters,” Wally said.
“That’s okay,” said Ray. “They been feeding me.”
“You got a better chance in a plane,” Wally said.
“Yes, a chance,” Candy said scornfully. “Why would you want to be

anywhere where all you get is a chance?”

“Good question,” Olive said crossly. She let the silver serving fork fall to the

meat platter with such force that the goose appeared to flinch.

“A chance is enough,” said Homer Wells, who did not immediately

recognize the tone in his own voice. “A chance is all we get, right? In the air,
or underwater, or right here, from the minute we’re born.” Or from the minute
we’re not born, he thought; now he recognized his tone of voice—it was Dr.
Larch’s.

“That’s a rather grim philosophy,” Olive said.
“I thought you were studying anatomy,” Wally said to Homer, who looked at

Candy, who looked away.

a faithful but terrible letter writer; he wrote his mother, he wrote to Homer
and to Candy, and even to Ray, but he never explained anything; if there was
a plan to what they were teaching him, Wally either didn’t know it or couldn’t
describe it. He simply wrote in tedious detail about the last thing that had
occupied his mind before beginning the letter; this included the pouch he had
devised to hang from his bunk bed to separate his shoe polish from his
toothpaste and the best-name-for-a-plane competition that dominated the
imaginative life of Company A. He was also delighted that a cook sergeant
had taught him more limericks than Senior, in his last years, had been able to
remember. Every letter Wally wrote, to anyone, included a limerick; Ray liked
them, and Homer liked them, but they made Candy angry and Olive was
appalled. Candy and Homer showed each other the limericks Wally sent them,
until Homer realized that this made Candy even angrier: the limericks Wally
chose to send Candy were very mild-mannered compared to the ones Wally
sent to Homer. For example, he sent this to Candy:

There was a young lady of Exeter,

So pretty that men craned their necks at her.

One was even so brave
As to take out and wave

The distinguishing mark of his sex at her.

He sent this to Homer Wells:

There was a young lady named Brent

With a cunt of enormous extent

And so deep and so wide,

The acoustics inside

Were so good you could hear when you spent.

Wally sent Ray limericks of a similar kind:

There’s an unbroken babe from Toronto

Exceedingly hard to get onto

But when you get there
And have parted the hair,

You can fuck her as much as you want to.

God knows what limericks Wally sent to Olive—where does Wally find

ones that are decent enough? wondered Homer, who, in the evenings after
Wally had gone and Candy had gone back to school, lay listening to his heart.
It would help, he thought, if he knew what to listen for.

Wally was sent to St. Louis—the Jefferson Barracks, Flight 17, 28th School

Squadron. It struck Homer Wells that the Army Air Corps might have
modeled itself on Gray’s Anatomy—manifesting a steadfast belief in
categories and in everything having a name. It was reassuring to Homer
Wells; in his mind, this endless categorizing made Wally safer, but Homer
couldn’t convince Candy of this.

“He’s safe one minute, and in another minute he’s not safe,” she said,

shrugging.

“Look after Homer, look after his heart,” Wally had written her.
“And who’s looking after my heart? Yes, I’m still angry,” she wrote him,

although he hadn’t asked.

But if she was angry with Wally, she was also loyal; she was keeping her

promise, about the waiting and seeing. She kissed Homer when she saw him,
and when they said good-bye, but she wouldn’t encourage him.

“We’re just good pals,” she told her father; Ray hadn’t asked.
“I can see that,” Ray said.

The men took turns teaching Homer how to prune. “You make your big cuts
in the subfreezing weather,” Meany Hyde told him.

hacking away.

was not so free with the prophylactics in the winter months, perhaps because
he would have needed to take his gloves off to get at them; but Homer felt
sure that Herb was being wary ever since Homer had asked him about the
holes.

“Are there holes?” Herb had replied. “Manufacturer’s defect, I suppose.”
But later he’d come up to Homer and whispered to him, “Not all of them’s

got holes.”

“You have a system?” Homer asked. “Which ones have holes and which

don’t?”

“It’s not my system,” Herb Fowler said. “Some got holes, some don’t.

Manufacturer’s defect.”

“Right,” said Homer Wells, but rubbers were rarely flung his way now.
Meany Hyde’s wife, Florence, was pregnant again, and all winter Big Dot

Taft and Irene Titcomb made jokes about Meany’s potency.

you sip my coffee. I think all you gotta do is breathe on somebody and they’re
pregnant.”

roar.

said.

“Meany can knock you up just by kissin’ your ears,” Florence Hyde said

proudly, glorying in her pregnancy.

“Gimme some earmuffs,” said Squeeze Louise Tobey. “Gimme one of them

ski hats.”

“Gimme a dozen of Herb’s rubbers!” said Irene Titcomb.
No, don’t take any, thought Homer Wells. That’s probably how she got that

way. Homer was staring at Florence Hyde. It was riveting to him to see
someone enjoying her pregnancy.

have a baby before?”

“Yes,” said Homer Wells, who looked away. Grace Lynch was staring at

him, and he looked away from her, too.

an orchard called Cock Hill, “I’d enlist. I’d do what Wally’s doing.”

“I can’t,” said Homer Wells.
“They don’t take orphans?” Vernon asked.
“No,” Homer said. “I have a heart defect. Something I was born with.”
Vernon Lynch was not a gossip, but that was all that Homer needed to say—

the workers at Ocean View not only forgave Homer for not enlisting, they
even began to take care of him. They treated him the way Dr. Larch would
have liked to see him treated.

manufacturer’s defect. I wouldn’t have said that if I’d known about your
heart.”

“That’s okay,” Homer said.
And in the early spring, when it was time to mend the boxes for the

beehives, Ira Titcomb rushed to assist Homer, who was struggling with a
particularly heavy pallet.

“Don’t strain yourself, Jesus!” Ira said.
“I can manage, Ira. I’m stronger than you are,” Homer said, not

understanding—at first—Ira’s concern.

“I heard your heart’s not as strong as the rest of you,” Ira said.
On Mother’s Day, Vernon Lynch taught him how to operate the sprayers by

himself. He insisted on giving Homer another lecture on the use of the
respirator. “You of all people,” Vernon told him, “better keep this thing on,
and keep it clean.”

“Me of all people,” said Homer Wells.
Even Debra Pettigrew forgave him for his seemingly undefined friendship

with Candy. As the weather warmed up, they went parking again, and one
night they managed some lingering kisses in the Pettigrews’ unoccupied
summer house on Drinkwater Lake; the shut-up, cold smell of the house
reminded Homer of his first days in the cider house. When his kisses seemed
too calm, Debra grew restless; when his kisses seemed too passionate, Debra
said, “Careful! Don’t get too excited.” He was a young man with unusual
kindness, or else he might have suggested to Debra that nothing she allowed
him to do would ever endanger his heart.

Corps cadet training (Squadron 2, Flight C), and Melony thought that the time
was right for her to hit the road again.

jobs there are for us. The country needs to build stuff—it don’t need to eat
more apples.”

and I’m gonna find him.”

“So will I see you next winter?” Lorna asked her friend.
“If I don’t find Ocean View or Homer Wells,” Melony said.
“So I’ll see you next winter,” Lorna said. “You’re lettin’ a man make an

asshole out of you.”

“That’s just what I’m not lettin’ him do,” Melony said.
Mrs. Grogan’s coat had seen better days, but the bundle of belongings

contained within the grasp of Charley’s belt had grown substantially. Melony
had made money in the shipyards, and she’d treated herself to a few sturdy
articles of a workingman’s clothing, including a good pair of boots. Lorna
gave her a present as she was leaving.

left-hand mitten—and too small for Melony, but the colors were very pretty.
“It was gonna be for a baby I never had, ’cause I didn’t stay married long
enough. I never got the right hand finished.” Melony stared at the mitten,
which she held in her hand—the mitten was very heavy; it was full of ball
bearings that Lorna had swiped from the shipyards. “It’s a super weapon,”
Lorna explained, “in case you meet anyone who’s a bigger asshole than you
are!”

good-bye. Melony left Bath without saying good-bye to young Mary Agnes
Cork, who would have done anything to please her, who asked all her school
friends—and everyone who appeared at Ted and Patty Callahan’s to browse
the antiques—if any of them had ever heard of an apple orchard called Ocean
View. If this knowledge might make Melony her friend, Mary Agnes Cork
would never stop inquiring. After Melony left Bath, Lorna realized how much
she missed her friend; Lorna discovered that she was asking about Ocean
View all the time—as if this inquiry was as necessary and loyal a part of her
friendship with Melony as the gift of that woolen weapon.

This meant that now there were three of them, all looking for Homer Wells.

That summer they moved Wally from San Antonio to Coleman, Texas. “I
wish someone would declare war on Texas,” he wrote Homer. “That might be
some justification for being here.” He claimed he was flying in his
undershorts and socks—that was all any of them could stand to wear in such
unrelenting heat.

“Where does he think he’s going?” Candy complained to Homer. “Does he

expect a perfect climate? He’s going to a war!” Homer sat opposite her on
Ray Kendall’s dock, the snail population forever influenced by their
conversation.

In the cool cement-floor classroom at Cape Kenneth High, Homer would

unroll the map of the world; there would rarely be anyone present besides the
janitor, who was no better informed about geography than Homer Wells.
Homer used the summer solitude to study the places of the world where he
thought it would be likely that Wally would go.

his old classroom out of nostalgia, or perhaps it was time to place an order for
the next year’s rabbits.

“I suppose you’ll be enlisting,” Mr. Hood said to Homer.
“No, sir,” Homer said. “I’ve got a bad heart—pulmonary valve stenosis.”
Mr. Hood stared at Homer’s chest; Homer knew that the man had eyes for

rabbits only—and not very sharp eyes, at that. “You had a heart murmur, from
birth?” Mr. Hood asked.

“Yes, sir,” Homer said.
“And do you still have a murmur?” Mr. Hood asked.
“Not much of one, not anymore,” Homer said.
“That’s not such a bad heart, then,” Mr. Hood said encouragingly.
But why would Homer Wells feel that Mr. Hood was an authority? He

couldn’t keep his uteri straight; he didn’t know rabbits from sheep.

younger; the men in their prime had enlisted, except for Mr. Rose.

“Slim pickin’s for pickers this year,” he told Olive. “There’s too many fools

think the war’s more interestin’ than pickin’ apples.”

“Yes, I know,” Olive said. “You don’t have to tell me about it.”
That harvest there was a woman Mr. Rose called Mama, although she wasn’t

old enough to be any of their mothers. Her allegiance seemed quite
exclusively assigned to Mr. Rose; Homer knew this because the woman did
what she wanted to do—she picked a little, when she felt like it or when Mr.
Rose suggested it; she cooked a little, but she was not the cook every night,
and she was not everyone’s cook. Some nights she even sat on the roof, but
only when Mr. Rose sat there with her. She was a tall, heavy young woman
with a deliberate slowness that made her movements seem copied from Mr.
Rose, and she wore a nearly constant smile that was not quite relaxed and not
quite smirking—also copied from Mr. Rose.

It surprised Homer that no special sleeping arrangements were made

regarding the woman; she had her own bed, next to Mr. Rose, but no attempt
was made to curtain-off their beds or otherwise construct a little privacy.
There was only this: every once in a while, when Homer would drive by the
cider house, he would note that everyone except Mr. Rose and his woman was
either standing outside the house or sitting on the roof. That must have been

their time together, and Mr. Rose must have orchestrated those meetings as
deliberately as he appeared to direct everything else.

Ferris wheel to watch at night, no magic lights to call by other names, but
these blackout conditions didn’t keep the pickers off the roof. They would sit
in the dark, looking at the dark, and Mr. Rose would say, “It used to be over
there—it was much higher than this roof, and brighter than all the stars if you
hitched the stars all together. It went ’round and ’round,” Mr. Rose would say,
the tall, heavy woman leaning against him, the dark heads above the roofline
nodding. “Now there’s stuff out there, under the ocean—stuff with bombs,
underwater guns. That stuff knows when there’s a light on, and the bombs get
drawn to the lights—like metal to them magnets. It happens automatically.”

“There’s no people, holding no triggers?” someone asked.
“There’s no triggers,” said Mr. Rose. “Everythin’s automatic. But there’s

people. They just there to look the stuff over, make sure it work right.”

“There’s people out there, under the ocean?” someone asked.
“Sure,” said Mr. Rose. “Lots of people. They real smart. They got this stuff

so they can see you.”

“On land?”
“Sure,” said Mr. Rose. “They can see you anywhere.”
A kind of communal sighing made the sitters on the roof resemble a chorus

resting between numbers. In Wally’s bedroom Homer marveled how the
world was simultaneously being invented and destroyed.

Cloud’s, except for the irritation about sugar stamps and other aspects of the
rationing, very little was changed by the war. (Or by what other people once
singled out as the Depression, thought Wilbur Larch.)

allowed to stay the same, he thought. When he would almost despair, when
the ether was too overpowering, when his own age seemed like the last
obstacle and the vulnerability of his illegal enterprise was as apparent to him
as the silhouettes of the fir trees against the sharp night skies of autumn,
Wilbur Larch would save himself with this one thought: I love Homer Wells,
and I have saved him from the war.

Homer Wells did not feel saved. Did anyone who was in love and was

unsatisfied with how he was loved in return ever feel saved? On the contrary,
Homer Wells felt that he’d been singled out for special persecution. What
young man—even an orphan—is patient enough to wait and see about love?
And if Wilbur Larch had saved Homer Wells from the war, even Dr. Larch
was powerless to interfere with Melony.

During the harvest that year, Wally moved again—to Perrin Field in

Sherman, Texas (basic training, Company D)—but Melony moved five times.
She had enough money; she didn’t need to work. She took a job in one
orchard after another, leaving as soon as she discovered that no one working
there had ever heard of an Ocean View. She worked in an orchard in
Harpswell, and in another in Arrowsic; she worked as far north as Rockport,
and as far inland as Appleton and Lisbon. She took a side trip to Wiscasset
because someone told her there was an Ocean View there; there was, but it
was a rooming house. An ice-cream vendor told her he’d seen an Ocean View
in Friendship; it turned out to be the name of a resident sailboat. Melony got
in a fistfight with a head waiter in a seafood restaurant in South Thomaston
because she insisted on asking each of the patrons about Ocean View; she
won the fight, but she was fined for creating a disturbance; she was a little
low on money when she passed through Boothbay Harbor in early November.
The sea was slate gray and whitecapped, the pretty boats of summer were in
dry dock, the wind had plenty of the coming winter in it; Melony’s own pores,
as well as the earth’s, were closing as tightly as her disappointed heart.

cream sodas to the candy-counter customers in Rinfret’s Pharmacy, but young
Roy Rinfret—the former (and deeply disappointed) Curly Day—recognized
Melony in an instant.

“I used to be Curly Day! Remember me?” Curly asked Melony excitedly.

He thrust a lot of free candy and chewing gum at her and insisted on treating
her to an ice-cream soda. “A double scooper, on me,” Curly said; his adoptive
parents would have disapproved.

“Boy, you didn’t turn out so good,” Melony told him. She meant nothing

insulting by this remark; it was a reference to his color, which was pasty, and
to his size—he hadn’t grown very much. She meant nothing more, but the
remark triggered everything that was morose and waiting to be fired in Curly
Day.

ditched. Homer Wells stole the people I was meant for.”

Melony’s teeth were too weak for chewing gum, but she pocketed it,

anyway; it would make a nice gift for Lorna. Melony’s cavities howled when
she sucked hard candy, but she liked it occasionally in spite of this pain—or
perhaps because of it—and she had never had an ice-cream soda before.

To demonstrate his loathing for his environment, Curly Day squirted a runny

glob of strawberry syrup on the floor—checking, first, to be sure that only
Melony could see. He did this as if he were exercising the nozzle before he
squirted the stuff on Melony’s soda. “It draws ants,” he explained; Melony

doubted there were many ants left in November. “That’s what they’re always
telling me,” Curly said. “ ‘Don’t spill, it draws ants.’ ” He squirted the floor a
few more times. “I’m tryin’ to get the ants to carry this place away.”

“You still pissed at Homer Wells?” Melony asked him slyly.
She explained that Curly should simply inquire—of every customer—about

Ocean View. Curly had never thought concretely about what he would do or
say to Homer Wells if he ever encountered him again; he was resentful, but he
was not a vengeful boy and he had a sudden, clear memory of Melony’s
violence. He became suspicious.

“What do you want to find Homer for?” Curly asked.
“What for?” Melony asked sweetly; it wasn’t clear if she had considered it.

“Well, what would you like to find him for, Curly?” she asked.

“Well,” Curly said, struggling. “I guess I’d just like to see him, and tell him

that I was really fucked up by his going off and leaving me there—when I
thought I was the one who should be going, instead of him.” When Curly
thought about it, he realized he’d just like to see Homer Wells—maybe be his
friend, maybe do stuff together. He’d always admired Homer. If he felt a little
deserted by him, that was all he felt. He started to cry. Melony used the paper
napkin that went with her ice-cream soda to wipe Curly’s tears for him.

“Hey, I know what you mean,” she said nicely. “I know how you feel. I got

left, too, you know. Really, I just miss the guy. I just want to see him.”

Rinfret, the pharmacist, who was stationed in that end of the store where the
serious drugs were dispensed.

“I’m from Saint Cloud’s,” Melony explained to Mr. Rinfret. “We were all so

close there—whenever we run into each other, it takes a little gettin’ used to.”
She hugged Curly in a motherly, if somewhat burly way, and Mr. Rinfret
allowed them their privacy.

as if she were telling him a bedtime story. “Ocean View, just keep asking
about Ocean View.” When she calmed him down, she gave him Lorna’s
address in Bath.

On her way back to Bath, Melony hoped that the shipyards would hire her

back and that the so-called war effort would keep the stuff on the assembly
line changing—that she might look forward to a task somewhat different from
the insertion of those ball bearings into that hamlike sprocket. With that
thought she removed Lorna’s gift mitten from the pocket of Mrs. Grogan’s
overcoat; she had not yet needed it as a weapon but many nights its presence
had comforted her. And it’s not been a thoroughly wasted year, Melony
reflected warmly, socking the heavy mitten with a painful smack into the

palm of her big hand. Now there are four of us looking for you, Sunshine.

They kept Wally in Texas, yet they moved him once more—to Lubbock
Flying School (Barracks 12, D3). He would spend November and most of
December there, but the Army Air Corps had promised to send him home for
Christmas.

“Soon to be in the bosom of my family!” he wrote to Candy, and Homer,

and Olive—and even to Ray, who had contributed to the war effort by joining
the force of mechanics at the Navy Yard in Kittery; Ray was building
torpedoes. He had hired some local boys who were still in school to help him
keep his lobster business from sinking, and he worked on the vehicles at
Ocean View on the weekends. He enthusiastically demonstrated the
gyroscope on Olive’s kitchen table to Olive and Homer Wells.

“Before a fella can fathom the torpedo,” Ray liked to say, “he has to

understand the gyroscope.” Homer was interested, Olive was polite—and
what’s more, thoroughly dependent on Ray; if he didn’t fix all the machinery
at Ocean View, Olive was convinced that the apples would stop growing.

Candy was cross much of the time—everyone’s war effort seemed to

depress her, although she had volunteered to pitch in herself and had worked
some very long hours at the Cape Kenneth Hospital as a nurse’s aide. She
agreed it would be “indulgent” to go to college, and she’d had no trouble
convincing Homer that he should pitch in, too—with his background, he
could be a more useful nurse’s aide than most.

“Right,” Homer had said.
But if Homer had returned to a semi-hospital life against his will, he soon

found he felt comfortable there; however, it was at times difficult to withhold
his expert opinion on certain subjects and to play the beginner in a role he was
disquietingly born to. Even the nurses were condescending to the nurse’s
aides, and Homer was irritated to see that the doctors were condescending to
everyone—most of all, to their patients.

Candy and Homer were not allowed to give shots or medication, but they

had more to do than make beds, empty bedpans, give back rubs and baths, and
run those errands of friendliness that gave the modern hospital such a constant
scuff of feet. They were given delivery-room duties, for example; Homer was
unimpressed with the obstetrical procedure he witnessed. It could not hold a
candle to Dr. Larch’s work, and in some cases it could not hold a candle to his
own. If Dr. Larch had often criticized Homer for his heavy touch with ether,
Homer could not imagine how the old man would react to the heavy-
handedness that was applied to that inhalation at Cape Kenneth Hospital. In
St. Cloud’s, Homer had seen many patients who were so lightly etherized that

they could converse throughout their own operations; in Cape Kenneth’s
recovery rooms, the patients struggling to emerge from their ether doses
looked bludgeoned—they snored gap-mouthed, with their hands hanging
deadweight and the muscles in their cheeks so slack that at times their eyes
were pulled half open.

doctors or the anesthesiologists were so uninformed that they didn’t pause to
consider the patient’s body weight.

recovering from a tonsillectomy. That was nurses’-aide work: you sat with the
patients coming out of ether, especially the children, especially the
tonsillectomies—they were often frightened and in pain and nauseous when
they woke. Homer claimed they wouldn’t be nearly so nauseous if they’d
been given a little less ether.

liked—a young, homely girl about their age. Her name was Caroline, and she
was nice to the patients and tough to the doctors.

“You know a lot about ether, Homer,” Nurse Caroline said.
“It seems overused to me, in certain cases,” Homer mumbled.
“Hospitals aren’t perfect, they’re just expected to be,” Nurse Caroline said.

“And doctors aren’t perfect, either; they just think they are.”

“Right,” said Homer Wells.
The five-year-old’s throat was very sore when he finally woke up, and he

went on retching for quite some time before any ice cream would slide down
his throat, and stay down. One of the things the nurses’ aides did was to be
sure that the children, in such condition, didn’t choke on their own vomit.
Homer explained to Candy that it was very important that the child, in a semi-
etherized state, not aspirate, or inhale, any fluid such as vomit into the lungs.

“Aspirate,” Nurse Caroline said. “Was your father a doctor, Homer?”
“Not exactly,” said Homer Wells.
It was Nurse Caroline who introduced Homer to young Dr. Harlow, who

was in the throes of growing out his bangs; a cowlick persisted in making his
forehead look meager; a floppy shelf of straw-colored hair gave Dr. Harlow’s
eyes the constant anxiousness of someone peering from under the brim of a
hat.

“Oh yes, Wells—our ether expert,” Dr. Harlow said snidely.
“I grew up in an orphanage,” said Homer Wells. “I did a lot of helping out

around the hospital.”

“But surely you never administered any ether?” said Dr. Harlow.
“Surely not,” lied Homer Wells. As Dr. Larch had discovered with the board

of trustees, it was especially gratifying to lie to unlikable people.

“Don’t show off,” Candy told Homer when they were driving back to

Heart’s Haven together. “It doesn’t become you, and it could get your Doctor
Larch in trouble.”

“When did I show off?” Homer asked.
“You really haven’t, yet,” Candy said. “Just don’t, okay?”
Homer sulked.
“And don’t sulk,” Candy told him. “That doesn’t become you, either.”
“I’m just waiting and seeing,” said Homer Wells. “You know how that is.”

He let her out at the lobster pound; he usually came in with her and chatted
with Ray. But Homer was mistaken to confuse Candy’s irritability either with
coldness toward him or with anything but the profoundest confusion of her
own.

could drive away. She indicated he should roll down his window. Then she
leaned inside and kissed him on the mouth, she yanked his hair, hard—with
both hands, tilting his head back—and then she bit him, quite sharply, in the
throat. She banged her head on the window frame when she pulled herself
back from him; her eyes were watery, but no tears spilled to her face.

teasing you? Do you think I know whether I want you or Wally?”

than mousing. It was the Goddamn mousing season again—how he hated
handling the poison!

happened where Ray worked—in Kittery Navy Yard—and the sailor’s
buddies had driven him around in a makeshift tourniquet, running out of gas
coupons and getting lost on the way to several hospitals much nearer to the
scene of the fight than the one in Cape Kenneth. The gash, into the fleshy web
between the sailor’s thumb and forefinger, extended nearly to the sailor’s
wrist. Homer helped Nurse Caroline wash the wound with ordinary white
soap and sterile water. Homer could not help himself—he was accustomed to
speaking to Nurse Angela and to Nurse Edna in the voice of an authority.

“Take his blood pressure, opposite arm,” he said to Nurse Caroline, “and put

the blood-pressure cuff on over a bandage—to protect the skin,” he added,
because Nurse Caroline was staring at him curiously. “The cuff might have to
be on there for a half hour or more,” said Homer Wells.

Harlow said to Homer; both the doctor and his nurse stared at Homer Wells as
if they had witnessed an ordinary animal touched with divine powers—as if

they half expected Homer to pass his hand over the profusely bleeding sailor
and stop the flow of blood as quickly as the tourniquet stopped it.

“Very neat job, Wells,” Dr. Harlow said. Homer observed the injection of the

0.5 percent Procaine into the wound and the subsequent probing of Dr.
Harlow. The knife had entered on the palmar side of the hand, observed
Homer Wells. He remembered his Gray’s, and he remembered the movie he
had seen with Debra Pettigrew: the cavalry officer with the arrow in his hand,
the arrow that fortunately missed the branch of the median nerve that goes to
the muscles of the thumb. He watched the sailor move his thumb.

nerve,” Dr. Harlow said slowly, to the cut-up sailor. “You’re lucky if that’s not
cut.”

“The knife missed it,” said Homer Wells.
“Yes, it did,” said Dr. Harlow, looking up from the wound. “How do you

know?” he asked Homer Wells, who held up the thumb of his right hand and
wiggled it.

“Not only an ether expert, I see,” said Dr. Harlow, still snidely. “Knows all

about muscles, too!”

for fun,” he added.

then. Why not tell me where all this blood is coming from.”

sympathetic contact—Nurse Caroline didn’t care for Dr. Harlow, either.
Despite Candy’s certain disapproval, Homer couldn’t help himself. “The
blood vessel is a branch of the palmar arch,” he said.

“Very good,” said Dr. Harlow, disappointed. “And what would you

recommend I do about it?”

“Tie it,” said Homer Wells. “Three-o chromic.”
“Precisely,” said Dr. Harlow. “You didn’t get that from Gray’s.” He pointed

out to Homer Wells that the knife had also cut the tendons of the flexor
digitorum profundus and the flexor digitorum sublimis. “And where might
they go?” he asked Homer Wells.

“To the index finger,” Homer said.
“Is it necessary to repair both tendons?” asked Dr. Harlow.
“I don’t know,” said Homer Wells. “I don’t know a lot about tendons,” he

added.

“How surprising!” said Dr. Harlow. “It is only necessary to repair the

profundus,” he explained. “I’m going to use two-o silk. I’ll need something
finer to bring the edges of the tendon together.”

“Four-o silk,” recommended Homer Wells.
“Very good,” said Dr. Harlow. “And something to close the palmar fascia?”
“Three-o chromic,” said Homer Wells.
“This boy knows his stitches!” Dr. Harlow said to Nurse Caroline, who was

staring intently at Homer Wells.

pressure dressing on the palm—you’ll want to curve the fingers a little bit
around the dressing.”

“That’s called ‘the position of function,’ ” Dr. Harlow said.
“I don’t know what it’s called,” Homer said.
“Were you ever in medical school, Wells?” Dr. Harlow asked him.
“Not exactly,” said Homer Wells.
“Do you plan to go?” Dr. Harlow asked.
“It’s not likely,” Homer said. He tried to leave the operating room then, but

Dr. Harlow called after him.

“Why aren’t you in the service?” he called.
“I’ve got a heart problem,” Homer said.
“I don’t suppose you know what it’s called,” said Dr. Harlow.
“Right,” said Homer Wells.
He might have found out about his pulmonary valve stenosis on the spot, if

he had only asked; he might have had an X ray, and an expert reading—he
could have learned the truth. But who seeks the truth from unlikable sources?

dumb stories—children’s books didn’t impress Homer Wells. But the
tonsillectomy patients were not likely to be around long enough to hear David
Copperfield or Great Expectations.

man recovering from the prostate operation.

Wells.

a healthy pink.

for plane spotting. They used what was called the yacht-watching tower at the
Haven Club, but Homer didn’t think any planes had been spotted. All the men
spotters—most of them Senior’s former drinking companions—had the
silhouettes of the enemy planes tacked on their lockers; the women brought
the silhouettes home and stuck them on places like the refrigerator door. Olive
was a plane spotter for two hours every day.

Homer studied the silhouettes that Olive had on the refrigerator.

I could learn all those, he was thinking. And I can learn everything there is

to know about apple farming. But what he already knew, he knew, was near-
perfect obstetrical procedure and the far easier procedure—the one that was
against the rules.

He thought about rules. That sailor with the slashed hand had not been in a

knife fight that was according to anyone’s rules. In a fight with Mr. Rose,
there would be Mr. Rose’s own rules, whatever they were. A knife fight with
Mr. Rose would be like being pecked to death by a small bird, thought Homer
Wells. Mr. Rose was an artist—he would take just the tip of a nose, just a
button or a nipple. The real cider house rules were Mr. Rose’s.

rules did Dr. Larch observe, which ones did he break, or replace—and with
what confidence? Clearly Candy was observing some rules, but whose? And
did Wally know what the rules were? And Melony—did Melony obey any
rules? wondered Homer Wells.

“Look,” said Lorna. “There’s a war, have you noticed?”

“So what?” said Melony.
“Because he’s probably in it, that’s so what!” Lorna said. “Because he either

enlisted or he’s gonna get drafted.”

Melony shook her head. “I can’t see him in a war, not him. He just doesn’t

belong there.”

“For Christ’s sake,” Lorna said. “You think everyone in a war belongs

there?”

“If he goes, then he’ll come back,” Melony said. The ice on the Kennebec in

December was not secure; it was a tidal river, it was brackish, and there was
open water, gray and choppy, in the middle. But not even Melony could throw
a beer bottle as far as the middle of that river in Bath. Her bottle, bounding off
the creaky ice, made a hollow sound and rolled toward the open water it
couldn’t reach. It disturbed a gull, who got up and walked a short way along
the ice, like an old woman holding up a number of cumbersome petticoats
above a puddle.

“Not everyone’s comin’ back from this war—that’s all I’m sayin’,” Lorna

replied.

Wally had trouble coming back from Texas. There were a series of delays,
and bad weather; the landing field was closed—when Homer and Candy
picked him up in Boston, the first thing he told them was that he had only
forty-eight hours. He was still happy, however—“He was still Wally,” Candy
would say later—and especially pleased that he’d received his commission.

cried, even Ray.

around. Homer wondered when Wally would want to be alone with Candy
and how they would manage it. Surely he wants to manage it, Homer thought.
Does she want to, too? he wondered.

For Christmas Eve everyone was together. And Christmas Day there was

nowhere to go; Olive was home, and Ray wasn’t building torpedoes or pulling
lobster traps. And the day after Christmas, Candy and Homer would have to
take Wally back to Boston.

Oh, Candy and Wally did plenty of hugging and kissing—everyone could

see that. On Christmas night, in Wally’s bedroom, Homer realized that he’d
been so glad to see Wally that he’d forgotten to notice very much about his
second Christmas away from St. Cloud’s. He also realized he’d forgotten to
send Dr. Larch anything—not even a Christmas card.

“I’ve got more flying school to get through,” Wally was saying, “but I think

it’s going to be India for me.”

“India,” said Homer Wells.
“The Burma run,” said Wally. “To go from India to China, you got to go

over Burma. The Japs are in Burma.”

Burma was mountains, that Burma was jungles. When they shot your plane
down, there would be quite a wide range of possible things to land on.

“How are things with Candy?” Homer asked.
“Great!” Wally said. “Well, I’ll see tomorrow,” he added.
Ray went early to build the torpedoes, and Homer observed that Wally left

Ocean View at about the same time Ray would be leaving for Kittery. Homer
spent the early morning being of little comfort to Olive. “Forty-eight hours is
not what I’d call coming home,” she said. “He hasn’t been here for a year—
does he call this a proper visit? Does the Army call it a proper visit?”

they had “managed it.” But how does one know such things, short of asking?

“Do you want me to drive?” Homer asked; he had the window seat, and

Candy sat between them.

“Why?” Wally asked.
“Maybe you want to hold hands,” Homer said; Candy looked at him.
“We’ve already held hands,” Wally said, laughing. “But thank you,

anyway!”

Candy did not look amused, Homer thought.
“So you’ve done it, you mean?” Homer Wells asked them both.

Candy stared straight ahead, and Wally didn’t laugh this time.
“What’s that, old boy?” he asked.
“I said, ‘So you’ve done it?’—had sex, I mean,” said Homer Wells.
“Jesus, Homer,” said Wally. “That’s a fine thing to ask.”
“Yes, we’ve done it—had sex,” Candy said, still looking straight ahead.
“I hope you were careful,” Homer said, to both of them. “I hope you took

some precautions.”

“Jesus, Homer!” Wally said.
“Yes, we were careful,” Candy said. Now she stared at him, her look as

neutral as possible.

“You should be careful—having sex with someone who’s about to fly over
Burma.”

she said. “Is it Burma?”

the matter with you?”

“I love you both,” said Homer Wells. “If I love you, I’ve got a right to ask

anything I want—I’ve got a right to know anything I want to know.”

all the way to Boston in silence, except that Wally said—trying to be funny
—“I don’t know about you, Homer. You’re becoming very philosophical.”

parting.

“I know you do,” Homer said.
On the way home, Candy said to Homer Wells: “I wouldn’t say

‘philosophical’; I would say eccentric. You’re becoming very eccentric, in my
opinion. And you don’t have a right to know everything about me, whether
you love me or not.”

love Wally?”

“I’ve grown up loving Wally,” Candy said. “I have always loved Wally, and

I always will.”

“Fine,” Homer said. “That’s all there is to it, then.”
“But I don’t even know Wally, anymore,” Candy said. “I know you better,

and I love you, too.”

His feelings were hurt: Wally hadn’t once asked him about his heart. What
would he have answered, anyway?

Wilbur Larch, who knew that there was absolutely nothing wrong with

Homer’s heart, wondered where Homer’s heart was. Not in St. Cloud’s, he
feared.

ARMY AIR FORCES—that is what his stationery said. Wally spent several
months in Victorville—all the pruning months, as Homer Wells would
remember them. Shortly after apple blossom time, when Ira Titcomb’s bees
had spread their marvelous life energies through the orchards of Ocean View,
Wally was sent to India.

bridge in Myitnge. Tracks and the embankment of the south approach were
badly smashed, and the south span of the bridge was destroyed. All aircraft
and crews returned safely. Wally also dropped his bombs on the industrial
area of Myingyan, but heavy clouds prevented adequate observation of the
destruction. In that summer, when Homer Wells was painting the cider house
white again, Wally bombed the jetty at Akyab and the Shweli bridge in
northern Burma; later he hit the railroad yards at Prome. He contributed to the
ten tons of bombs that were dropped on the railroad yards at Shwebo, and to
the fires that were left burning in the warehouses at Kawlin and
Thanbyuzayat. The most spectacular hits he would remember were in the oil
fields in Yenangyat—the sight of those oil derricks ablaze would stay with
Wally on his return flight, across the jungles, across the mountains. All
aircraft and crews returned safely.

They made him a captain and gave him what he called “easy work.”
“Always be suspicious of easy work,” Dr. Wilbur Larch once said to Homer

Wells.

Wally had won the best-name-for-a-plane competition at Fort Meade; now

he finally got to use it; he got to name his own plane. Opportunity Knocks, he
called it. The painted fist under the inscription looked very authoritative. It
would later puzzle Candy and Homer Wells that the name was not Knocks
Once (or Twice), but just Knocks.

He flew the India–China route, over the Himalayas—over Burma. He

carried gasoline and bombs and artillery and rifles and ammunition and
clothing and aircraft engines and spare parts and food to China; he brought
military personnel back to India. It was a seven-hour, round-trip flight—about
five hundred miles. For six of the hours he wore an oxygen mask—they had
to fly so high. Over the mountains they flew high because of the mountains;
over the jungles they flew high because of the Japanese. The Himalayas have
the most vicious air currents in the world.

When he left Assam, the temperature was a hundred and ten degrees,

and socks.

thirty-five minutes; that was when they reached the first mountain pass.

on the fleece-lined suit. It was twenty degrees below zero up there. In the
monsoon weather, they flew mostly on instrument.

hump.”

Here were the headlines on the Fourth of July:

YANKS WRECK RAIL BRIDGE IN BURMA
CHINESE ROUT JAPS IN HUPEH PROVINCE

Here is what Wally wrote to Candy, and to Homer. Wally was getting lazy;

he sent the same limerick to both:

There was a young man of Bombay
Who fashioned a cunt out of clay,

But the heat of his prick
Turned it into a brick,

And chafed all his foreskin away.

That summer of 194_ the public interest in keeping use of the shore lights to

a minimum forced the temporary closing of the Cape Kenneth Drive-In
Theater, which Homer Wells did not feel as a tragic loss. Since he would have
had no choice but to attend the movies with Candy and Debra Pettigrew, he
was grateful to the war effort for sparing him that awkwardness.

Mr. Rose informed Olive that he would be unable to provide a worthwhile

picking crew for the harvest. “Considering the men who are gone,” he wrote.
“And the travel. I mean the gas rationing.”

“Then we’ve spruced up the cider house for nothing,” Homer said to Olive.
“Nothing is ever improved for nothing, Homer,” she said. The Yankee

justification for hard work in the summer months is both desperate and
undone by the rare pleasure of that fleeting season.

Homer Wells—nurses’ aide and orchardman—was mowing in the rows

between the trees when the news came to him. On a sweltering June day, he
was driving the International Harvester and he had his eye on the sickle bar;
he didn’t want to snag a stump or a fallen branch; for that reason he didn’t see
the green van, which was trying to head him off. He almost ran into it.
Because the tractor was running—and the mower blades, too—he didn’t hear
what Candy was yelling when she jumped out of the van and ran to him.
Olive was driving, her face a stone.

ignition. “He was shot down—over Burma!”

the sobbing girl in his arms. The tractor was shut off but the engine still
knocked, and then shuddered, and then throbbed; its heat made the air
shimmer. Maybe, thought Homer Wells, the air is always shimmering over
Burma.

Over Burma

Two weeks after Wally’s plane was shot down, Captain Worthington and the
crew of Opportunity Knocks were still listed as missing.

A plane making the same run had noted that approximately one square mile

of the Burmese jungle, roughly halfway between India and China, had been
consumed by fire—presumably caused by the exploding plane; the cargo was
identified as jeep engines, spare parts, and gasoline. There was no evidence of
the crew; the jungle was dense in that area and believed to be unpopulated.

A spokesman for the U.S. Army Air Forces paid a personal visit to Olive

and told her that there was some reason to be optimistic. That the plane
obviously had not exploded in the air meant that the crew might have had
time to bail out. What would have happened afterward was anyone’s guess.

That would have been a better name for the plane, thought Homer Wells:

“Anyone’s Guess.” But Homer was supportive of Olive and Candy’s view that
Wally was not dead, that he was “just missing.” Privately, Homer and Ray
Kendall agreed that there wasn’t much hope for Wally.

“Just suppose he didn’t go down with the plane,” Ray said to Homer, when

they were pulling lobster pots. “So then he’s in the middle of the jungle, and
what does he do there? He can’t let the Japs find him, and there’s got to be
Japs around—they shot down the plane, didn’t they?”

“There could be natives,” said Homer Wells. “Friendly Burmese villagers,”

he suggested.

“Or nobody at all,” Ray Kendall said. “Some tigers, and lots of snakes,” he

added. “Aw, shit. He shoulda been in a submarine.”

“If your friend survived all the rest,” wrote Wilbur Larch to Homer Wells,

“he’s got all the diseases of Asia to worry about—lots of diseases.”

It was horrible to imagine Wally suffering, and not even Homer’s longing

for Candy could allow him any comfort with the idea that Wally was already
dead; in that case, Homer knew, Candy would always imagine that she loved

Wally best. Reality, for orphans, is so often outdistanced by their ideals; if
Homer wanted Candy, he wanted her ideally. In order for Candy to choose
Homer, Wally had to be alive; and because Homer loved Wally, he also
wanted Wally’s blessing. Wouldn’t any other way be compromising to them
all?

romantic love, of all things! (“How should I behave with Candy?” Homer had
asked.) The old man was used to being such an authority that he found it
natural to assume an authoritative voice—“Even regarding a subject he knows
nothing about!” Nurse Angela said to Nurse Edna indignantly. Larch was so
proud of what he had written Homer that he showed his letter to his old nurses
before sending it along.

“Have you forgotten what life is like at St. Cloud’s?” Dr. Larch asked

Homer. “Have you drifted so far away from us that you find a life of
compromise to be unacceptable? And you, an orphan—of all people. Have
you forgotten how to be of use? Don’t think so badly of compromises; we
don’t always get to choose the ways we can be of use. You say you love her—
then let her use you. It may not be the way you had in mind, but if you love
her, you have to give her what she needs—and when she needs it, not
necessarily when you think the time is right. And what can she give you of
herself? Only what she has left—and if that’s not everything you had in mind,
whose fault is that? Are you not going to accept her because she hasn’t got
100 percent of herself to give? Some of her is over Burma—are you going to
reject the rest? Are you going to hold out for all or nothing? And do you call
that being of use?”

“It’s not very romantic,” Nurse Angela said to Nurse Edna.
“When was Wilbur ever romantic?” Nurse Edna asked.
“Your advice is awfully utilitarian,” Nurse Angela said to Dr. Larch.
“Well, I should hope so!” Dr. Larch said, sealing the letter.
Now Homer had a companion in sleeplessness. He and Candy preferred the

night shift at Cape Kenneth Hospital. When there was a lull in their work,
they were allowed to doze on the beds in the children’s noncommunicable
ward. Homer found that the music of the restless children soothed him—their
troubles and pains familiar, their whimpers and outcries and night terrors
transporting him beyond his own anxieties. And Candy felt that the drawn,
black curtains in the nighttime hospital were suitable for mourning. The
prevailing blackout conditions—which she and Homer had to observe in
driving to and from the hospital, if it was after dark—were also to Candy’s
liking. They used Wally’s Cadillac for these occasions—they were permitted
to travel with only parking lights on, and the Cadillac’s parking lights were

the brightest. Even so, the dark coastal roads seemed barely lit; they drove at
funeral speed. If the stationmaster at St. Cloud’s (formerly, the stationmaster’s
assistant) had ever seen them passing, he would have thought again that they
were driving a white hearse.

sure his new baby would share something of Wally’s soul (if Wally was truly
dead)—and if Wally was alive, Meany said, the appearance of the new baby
would signify Wally’s escape from Burma. Everett Taft told Homer that his
wife, Big Dot, had been plagued by dreams that could only mean that Wally
was struggling to communicate with Ocean View. Even Ray Kendall, dividing
his underwater attention between his lobsters and his torpedoes, said that he
was “reading” his lobster pots, by which he meant that he found the content of
the traps hauled from the deep to be worthy of interpretation. Untouched bait
was a special sign; if the lobsters (which prefer food that’s truly dead)
wouldn’t take the bait, it must mean that the bait was manifesting a living
spirit.

“And you know I ain’t religious,” Ray said to Homer.
“Right,” Homer said.
Because Homer Wells had spent many years wondering if his mother would

ever return to claim him, if she even thought about him, if she was alive or
dead, he was better at accepting Wally’s undefined status than the rest of them
were. An orphan understands what it means that someone important is “just
missing.” Olive and Candy, mistaking Homer’s composure for indifference,
were occasionally short-tempered with him.

“I’m only doing what we all have to do,” he said—reserving special

emphasis for Candy. “I’m just waiting and seeing.”

have violated the blackout conditions, and for another, any simulation of
bombs and gunfire would have been disrespectful to those among “our boys”
who were facing the real music. In the nighttime hospital at Cape Kenneth,
the nurses’ aides conducted a quiet Independence Day celebration, which was
interrupted by the hysterics of a woman who demanded an abortion from the
young and imperious Dr. Harlow, who believed in obeying the law. “But there
is a war!” the woman countered. Her husband was dead; he’d been killed in
the Pacific; she had the wire from the War Department to prove it. She was
nineteen, and not quite three months pregnant.

“I’ll be glad to speak with her again, when she’s behaving reasonably,” Dr.

Harlow told Nurse Caroline.

“Why should she behave reasonably?” Nurse Caroline asked him.
Homer Wells had to trust his instincts regarding Nurse Caroline; besides, she

had told him and Candy that she was a socialist. “And I’m not pretty,” she
added truthfully. “Therefore, I’m not interested in marriage. In my case, I’d
be expected to appear grateful—or, at least, to consider myself lucky.”

The hysterical woman would not be calmed, perhaps because Nurse

Caroline’s heart wasn’t in it. “I’m not asking for anything secret!” the woman
shouted. “Why should I have to have this baby?”

He wrote the following across the columns:

YOU GO TO ST. CLOUD’S, YOU ASK FOR THE ORPHANAGE.

He gave the piece of paper to Candy, who gave it to Nurse Caroline—who
looked at it before she gave it to the woman, who instantly stopped protesting.

When the woman had gone, Nurse Caroline made Homer and Candy

accompany her to the dispensary.

“I’ll tell you what I usually do,” Nurse Caroline said, as if she were furious

with them. “I perform a perfectly safe dilation without the curettage. I just
dilate the cervix. I do this in my kitchen, and I’m very careful. They have to
come to the hospital for a completion, of course. Someone might think they
tried to do it to themselves, but there’s no infection and nothing’s damaged;
they’ve just miscarried. They’ve had the D without the C. All they need is a
good scraping. And the bastards have to be accommodating—there’s all the
bleeding, and it’s clear the woman’s already lost it.” She paused, and glared at
Homer Wells. “You’re an expert about this, too, aren’t you?”

“Right,” Homer said.
“And you know a better way than my way?” she asked.
“Not that much better,” he said. “It’s a complete D and C, and the doctor is a

gentleman.”

“A gentleman,” Nurse Caroline said doubtfully. “What’s the gentleman

cost?”

“He’s free,” Homer said.
“I’m free, too,” Nurse Caroline said.
“He asks you to make a donation to the orphanage, if you can afford it,” said

Homer Wells.

“Why hasn’t he been caught?” Nurse Caroline asked.
“I don’t know,” Homer said. “Maybe people are grateful.”
“People are people,” Nurse Caroline said, in her socialist voice. “You took a

stupid chance, telling me. And a more stupid chance telling that woman—you
don’t even know her.”

“Yes,” Homer agreed.
“Your doctor isn’t going to last if you keep that up,” Nurse Caroline said.

“Right,” Homer said.
Dr. Harlow found them all in the dispensary; only Candy looked guilty, and

therefore he stared at her.

of time looking at Candy when he thought no one saw him, but Homer Wells
saw him and Nurse Caroline was very sensitive to the longings other women
inspired. Candy was tongue-tied, which made her seem more guilty, and Dr.
Harlow turned to Nurse Caroline. “You got rid of the hysteric?” he asked her.

“No problem,” Nurse Caroline said.
“I know that you disapprove,” Dr. Harlow told her, “but rules exist for

reasons.”

stupid thing to say, he felt compelled to repeat it. Dr. Harlow stared at him.

“No doubt you’re an abortion expert, too, Wells,” Dr. Harlow said.
“It’s not very hard to be an abortion expert,” Homer Wells said. “It’s a pretty

easy thing to do.”

“You think so?” Dr. Harlow asked aggressively.
“Well, what do I know?” Homer Wells said, shrugging.
“Yes, what do you know?” Dr. Harlow said.
“Not much,” Nurse Caroline said gruffly; even Dr. Harlow appreciated this.

Even Candy smiled. Homer Wells smiled sheepishly, too. You see? I’m
getting smarter! That is what he smiled to Nurse Caroline, who viewed him
with an expression of condescension that was proper for nurses to exhibit
only to nurses’ aides. Dr. Harlow seemed to feel that the pecking order he
revered was being treated with the reverence that was mandatory from them
all. A kind of glaze appeared to coat his face, a texture composed of
righteousness and adrenaline. Homer Wells gave himself a brief sensation of
pleasure by imagining something that could wake up Dr. Harlow, and humble
him. Mr. Rose’s knife work might have that effect on Dr. Harlow—Homer
imagined Mr. Rose undressing Dr. Harlow with his knife; every article of
clothing would be gathered around the doctor’s ankles, in strips and tatters,
yet on the doctor’s naked body there wouldn’t be a scratch.

A month after Wally’s plane was shot down, they heard from the crew of
Opportunity Knocks.

“We were halfway to China,” the co-pilot wrote, “when the Nips took some

potshots. Captain Worthington ordered the crew to bail out.”

The crew chief and the radioman jumped close together; the co-pilot jumped

third. The roof of the jungle was so dense that when the first man crashed
through it, he could not see the other parachutes. The jungle itself was so

thick that the crew chief had to search for the others—it took him seven hours
to find the radioman. The rain was so heavy—it made such a din against the
broad palm leaves—none of the men heard the plane explode. The
atmosphere was so rich with its own scents that the smell of the burning
gasoline and the smoke from the fire never reached them. They wondered if
the plane had not miraculously recovered itself and flown on. When they
looked up, they could not see through the treetops (which everywhere
glittered with bright green pigeons).

which the radioman thoughtfully removed; the crew chief plucked fifteen
leeches off the radioman. They found that the best way to remove the leeches
was to touch the lighted end of a cigarette to their posterior ends; that way,
they would release their contact with the flesh. If you just pulled them, they
kept breaking; their strong sucking mouths would remain attached.

which it did, most of the time—they drank the rainwater that gathered in
puddles in the big palm leaves. They were afraid to drink the other water they
encountered. In some of the water they thought they saw crocodiles. Because
the radioman was afraid of snakes, the crew chief did not point out the snakes
he saw; the crew chief was afraid of tigers, and he thought he saw one, once,
but the radioman maintained that they only heard a tiger, or several tigers—or
the same tiger, several times. The crew chief said that the same tiger followed
them for five days.

the pelting rain louder, it did keep the rain from falling directly on the two
men; yet the jungle was so saturated that the rain almost constantly dripped on
them—and when, for brief intervals, the rain stopped, the roof of the jungle
allowed no sunlight to penetrate to the jungle floor, and the raucous birds,
silent in the rain, were louder than the rain when they had their opportunities
to protest the monsoon.

were. On the fifth day they met up with the co-pilot, who had reached a native
village only a day ahead of them. He was quite badly drained by the leeches
—since he’d been traveling alone, he’d had no one to burn off the leeches he
couldn’t reach. In the middle of his back, there had been quite a gathering of
them, which the natives were skillful at removing. They used a lighted stalk
of bamboo, like a cigar. The natives were Burmese, and friendly; although
they spoke no English, they made it clear that they had no fondness for the
Japanese invasion, and also that they knew the way to China.

the canes of bamboo that he had to hack his way through were as stout as a
man’s thigh. The edge of his machete was as dull and round as the back of the
blade.

where they were; some of the villagers would lead the co-pilot, the crew
chief, and the radioman into China. For that trip, they darkened their skin with
mashed peepul berries and tied orchids in their hair; they didn’t want to look
like white men.

miles. They cooked no food; at the end of the journey, their rice was moldy—
there was so much rain. The crew chief claimed he was terminally
constipated; the co-pilot claimed he was dying of diarrhea. The radioman shat
rabbit pellets and carried a low-grade fever for fifteen of the twenty days; he
grew a helmet of ringworm. Each man lost about forty pounds.

Then they were flown back to India, where the co-pilot was retained in the
hospital for diagnosis and treatment of an amoeba—no one could say what
amoeba it was. The crew chief had a colon problem; he was also retained. The
radioman (and his ringworm) went back to work. “They took all our gear
when they put us in the hospital in China,” he wrote to Olive. “When they
gave it back to us, it was all lumped together. There was four compasses.
There was just three of us, but there was four compasses. One of us jumped
out of the plane with Captain Worthington’s compass.” In the radioman’s
opinion, it was better to have crashed with the plane than to have landed in
that part of Burma without a compass.

the United States. Candy told Homer that she needed a new place to sit, to be
left alone. The dock made her want to jump off; she’d sat too many times on
that dock with Wally. It didn’t help that Homer would sit there with her now.

“I know a place,” Homer told her.
Maybe Olive was right, he thought; maybe they hadn’t cleaned the cider

house for nothing. When it rained, Candy sat inside and listened to the drops
on the tin roof. She wondered if the jungle sounded as loud as that, or louder,
and if the sweet rot smell of the cider apples was anything like the stifling
decay-in-progress smell of the jungle floor. When the weather was clear,
Candy sat on the roof. Some nights she allowed Homer Wells to tell her
stories there. Perhaps it was the absence of the Ferris wheel and of Mr. Rose’s
interpretations of the darkness that prompted Homer Wells to tell Candy
everything.

That summer, Wilbur Larch wrote to the Roosevelts again. He had written to
them both so many times under the constellations of ether that he was unsure
whether he had actually written to them or had only imagined doing it. He
never wrote to one without writing to the other.

occasionally he felt more informal and began, “Dear Franklin Delano
Roosevelt”; once he even began, “Dear Eleanor.”

wrote, dispensing with the endearment, “I know that you must be terribly
busy with the war, yet I feel such confidence in your humanitarianism—and
in your commitment to the poor, to the forgotten, and especially to children
. . .” To Mrs. Roosevelt, he wrote: “I know your husband must be very busy,
but perhaps you could point out to him a matter of the utmost urgency—for it
concerns the rights of women and the plight of the unwanted child . . .”

contributed to the strident and incomprehensible manner of the letter.

they are the same people who seem not so interested in defending anyone but
themselves after the accident of birth is complete! These same people who
profess their love of the unborn’s soul—they don’t care to make much of a
contribution to the poor, they don’t care to offer much assistance to the
unwanted or the oppressed! How do they justify such a concern for the fetus
and such a lack of concern for unwanted and abused children? They condemn
others for the accident of conception; they condemn the poor—as if the poor
can help being poor. One way the poor could help themselves would be to be
in control of the size of their families. I thought that freedom of choice was
obviously democratic—was obviously American!

you tolerate this country’s anti-American, anti-democratic abortion laws?”

By now Dr. Larch had stopped writing and was ranting in the dispensary.

Nurse Edna went to the dispensary door and rattled the frosted-glass panels.

“Is it a democratic society that condemns people to the accident of

conception?” roared Wilbur Larch. “What are we—monkeys? If you expect
people to be responsible for their children, you have to give them the right to
choose whether or not to have children. What are you people thinking of?
You’re not only crazy! You’re ogres!” Wilbur Larch was yelling so loudly
that Nurse Edna went into the dispensary and shook him.

“Wilbur, the children can hear you,” she told him. “And the mothers.

Everyone can hear you.”

twitching in Wilbur Larch’s cheeks and the slackness in his lower lip; the
doctor was just emerging from ether. “The President doesn’t answer my
letters,” Larch complained to Nurse Edna.

letters.”

“What about Eleanor?” Wilbur Larch asked.
“What about Eleanor?” Nurse Edna asked.
“Doesn’t she get to read her letters?” Wilbur Larch’s tone of voice was

whiny, like a child’s, and Nurse Edna patted the back of his hand, which was
spotted with brown freckles.

get around to answering you.”

“It’s been years,” Dr. Larch said quietly, turning his face to the wall. Nurse

Edna let him doze in that position for a while. She restrained herself from
touching him; she was inclined to brush his hair back from his forehead, in
the manner that she often soothed any number of the little ones. Were they all
becoming children again? And were they, as Nurse Angela claimed, all
becoming the same, all resembling each other, even physically? Anyone
visiting St. Cloud’s for the first time might suspect that they were all members
of the same family.

Suddenly Nurse Angela surprised her in the dispensary.
“Well, are we out of it?” she asked Nurse Edna. “What’s the trouble? I was

sure I ordered a whole case.”

“A case of what?” Nurse Edna asked.
“Merthiolate—red,” Nurse Angela said crossly. “I asked you to get me some

red Merthiolate—there’s not a drop left in the delivery room.”

“Oh, I forgot!” said Nurse Edna, bursting into tears.
Wilbur Larch woke up.
“I know how busy you both are,” he said to the Roosevelts, although he

gradually recognized Nurse Edna and Nurse Angela—their tired arms held
out to him. “My faithful friends,” he said, as if he were addressing a vast
audience of well-wishers. “My fellow laborers,” said Wilbur Larch, as if he
were running for reelection—a little tiredly, but no less earnestly seeking the
support of his companions who also honored the Lord’s work.

Olive Worthington sat in Wally’s room with the lights off; that way, if Homer
looked into the house from the outside, he wouldn’t see her sitting there. She
knew that Homer and Candy were at the cider house, and she tried to tell
herself that she did not resent the apparent comfort Homer could give to
Candy. (He was powerless to comfort Olive in the slightest; in truth, Homer’s

presence—given Wally’s absence—irritated Olive, and it was testimony to her
strength of character that she was able to criticize herself for this irritation;
only rarely did she allow her irritation to show.) And she would never have
considered Candy unfaithful—not even if Candy had announced to everyone
that she was giving Wally up and marrying Homer Wells. It was only that
Olive knew Candy: Olive realized that Candy could not give Wally up
without giving him up for dead, and Olive would have resented that. He
doesn’t feel dead! Olive thought. And it isn’t Homer’s fault that he is here and
Wally is there, she reminded herself.

that she forgot why she was keeping Wally’s room in darkness; she turned on
the lights to hunt for the mosquito. Wouldn’t there be terrible mosquitoes
where Wally was? The Burmese mosquitoes were speckled (and much larger
than the Maine variety).

Ray Kendall was also alone, but he was only mildly bothered by the

mosquitoes. It was a still night, and Ray watched the silent heat lightning
violate the blackout conditions along the coast. He was worried about Candy.
Raymond Kendall knew how someone else’s death could arrest your own life,
and he regretted (in advance) how the forward motion of Candy’s life might
be halted by her losing Wally. “If it was me,” Ray said aloud, “I’d take the
other fella.”

“The other fella,” Ray knew, was more like Ray; it wasn’t that Ray preferred

Homer Wells to Wally—it was that Ray understood Homer better. Yet Ray did
not disrupt a single snail while he sat on his dock; he knew that it took a snail
too long to get where it was going.

“you’re making someone start his whole life over.”

admit that he liked that boy.

was not visible even in the brightest flashes. Yet the lightning was more
disquieting there; both its distance and its silence reminded Candy and Homer
Wells of a war they could not feel or hear. For them, it was a war of far-off
flashes.

roof, they held hands.

lights go on in Wally’s room.

That night in August, the trees were full, the boughs bent and heavy, and the

apples—all but the bright, waxy-green Gravensteins—were a pale green-

going-to-pink. The grass in the rows between the trees was knee-high; there
would be one more mowing before the harvest. That night there was an owl
hooting from the orchard called Cock Hill; Candy and Homer also heard a fox
bark from the orchard called Frying Pan.

“Foxes can climb trees,” said Homer Wells.
“No, they can’t,” Candy said.
“Apple trees, anyway,” Homer said. “Wally told me.”
“He’s alive,” Candy whispered.
In the flash of heat lightning that illuminated her face, Homer saw her tears

sparkle; her face was wet and salty when he kissed her. It was a trembling,
awkward proposition—kissing on the cider house roof.

“I love you,” said Homer Wells.
“I love you, too,” Candy said. “But he’s alive.”
“He isn’t,” Homer said.
“I love him,” Candy said.
“I know you do,” said Homer Wells. “I love him, too.”
Candy lowered her shoulder and put her head against Homer’s chest so that

he couldn’t kiss her; he held her with one arm while his other hand strayed to
her breast, where it stayed.

“This is so hard,” she whispered, but she let his hand stay where it was.

There were those distant flashes of light, out to sea, and a warm breeze so
faint it barely stirred the apple leaves or Candy’s hair.

which she was unable to strike it) to a spot on the white wall above Homer’s
bed. When she mashed the mosquito with the heel of her hand, the dime-sized
spot of blood left on the wall surprised her—the filthy little creature had been
gorging itself. Olive wet her index finger and dabbed at the blood spot, which
only made the mess worse. Angry at herself, she got up from Homer’s bed,
unnecessarily smoothing his untouched pillow; she smoothed Wally’s
untouched pillow, too; then she turned off the night-table lamp. She paused in
the doorway of the empty room to look things over, and turned off the
overhead light.

must have known it was precarious to kiss on top of the cider house; it was
more dangerous for them on the ground. They were standing together, arms
loosely around each other’s waists—his chin touching her forehead (she was
shaking her head, No, No, but just a little)—when they both became aware
that the lights from Wally’s room were out. They leaned against each other as
they walked to the cider house, the tall grass clutching at their legs.

They preferred the darkness; because they did not reach for the light switch in
the kitchen, they never came in contact with the cider house rules that were
tacked next to it. Only the palest flashes of the heat lightning showed them the
way to the sleeping quarters, where the twin rows of iron beds stood with
their harsh springs exposed—the old mattresses rolled in Army barracks
fashion at the foot of each bed. They unrolled one.

encountered upon that bed was rich. The small moan that caught in the back
of Candy’s throat was soft and difficult to hear above the iron screeching of
the bed’s rusted springs; the moan was as delicate in that fermented air as the
fluttery touch of Candy’s hands, lighting like butterflies upon Homer’s
shoulders, before he felt her hands grip him hard—her fingers sinking in as
she held him tight. The moan that escaped her then was sharper than the
grinding bed springs and nearly as loud as Homer’s own sound. Oh, this boy
whose crying had once been a legend upriver in Three Mile Falls—oh, how
he could sound!

on Cock Hill. What is it hooting about? she thought. She thought of anything
that would distract her from her vision of the mosquitoes in the jungles of
Burma.

woman had absolutely nothing to fear. It was an owl she heard—it made such
a mournful sound.

careful fingers across the keyboard of the typewriter in Nurse Angela’s office.
“Oh please, Mr. President,” he wrote.

night oppressive; it seemed to him that he couldn’t breathe. He was lazy about
getting out of bed, and therefore blew his nose on his pillowcase. Nurse Edna
rushed to him at the sound of such thick and troubled trumpeting. Although
Steerforth’s allergies were not severe, the last orphan who was allergic to dust
and mold was Fuzzy Stone.

Roosevelt. “And your voice on the radio gives me hope. As a member of the
medical profession, I am aware of the insidiousness of the disease you have
personally triumphed over. After you, anyone who holds your office will be
ashamed if he fails to serve the poor and the neglected—or should be
ashamed . . .”

Ray Kendall, stretched out upon his dock as if the sea had cast him up there,

coastal air to be so torpid; the air was simply air-as-usual at St. Cloud’s.

I think it was Episcopal,” wrote Wilbur Larch to the President. “I don’t know
what they tell you in that church about abortion, but here is something you
should know. Thirty-five to forty-five percent of our country’s population
growth can be attributed to unplanned, unwanted births. Couples who are
well-to-do usually want their babies; only seventeen percent of the babies
born to well-to-do parents are unwanted. BUT WHAT ABOUT THE POOR?
Forty-two percent of the babies born to parents living in poverty are
unwanted. Mr. President, that is almost half. And these are not the times of
Ben Franklin, who (as you probably know) was so keen to increase the
population. It has been the goal of your administration to find enough things
for the present population to do, and to better provide for the present
population. Those who plead for the lives of the unborn should consider the
lives of the living. Mr. Roosevelt—you, of all people!—you should know that
the unborn are not as wretched or as in need of our assistance as the born!
Please take pity on the born!”

and prayed.

warily in the crotch between the tree’s largest branches—a red fox, its ears
and nose alert, its tail poised as lightly as a feather, surveyed the orchard with
a predatory eye. To the fox, the ground below twitched with rodents, although
the fox had not climbed the tree for the view—it had run up the tree to eat a
bird, a feather of which was thrust through the fox’s whiskers and into the
rust-colored goatee on the fierce little animal’s pointed chin.

Candy Kendall clung to Homer Wells—oh, how she clung!—as the breath

left them both and stirred the otherwise unmoving air. And the trembling mice
beneath the floor of the cider house stopped in their tracks between the cider
house walls to listen to the lovers. The mice knew there was the owl to worry
about, and the fox. But what animal was this whose sound was petrifying
them? The owl does not hoot when it hunts, and the fox does not bark when it
pounces. But what is this new animal? wondered the cider house mice—what
new beast has charged and disturbed the air?

And is it safe?

In Wilbur Larch’s opinion, love was certainly not safe—not ever. For his own
advancing frailty since Homer Wells had departed St. Cloud’s, he would have
said love was to blame; how tentative he had become concerning some things
and how suddenly irritable concerning others. Nurse Angela might have

suggested to him that his more recent bouts of gloom and anger were as much
the result of his fifty-year-old addiction to ether and of his advanced age as
they were the result of his anxious love for Homer Wells. Mrs. Grogan, had
she been asked, would have told him that he suffered more from what she
called St. Cloud’s syndrome than from love; Nurse Edna would never have
held love to blame for anything.

polio that President Roosevelt had stood up to so courageously. And could
anyone blame Larch if he occasionally referred to the so-called products of
conception as the “results of love”?—although his dear nurses were upset
with him when he spoke like this. Did he not have a right to judge love
harshly? After all, there was much evidence—in both the products of
conception, and their attendant pain, and in the injured lives of many of Dr.
Larch’s orphans—to justify his view that there was no more safety to be
found in love than there was to be found in a virus.

Wells—had he tasted their sweat and touched the tension in the muscles of
their shining backs; had he heard the agony and the release from agony that
could be detected in their voices—Wilbur Larch would not have changed his
mind. A passing glimpse of such passion would have confirmed his opinion of
the danger of love; he would have been as petrified as the mice.

In Dr. Larch’s opinion, even when he could prevail on his patients to

practice some method of birth control, love was never safe.

Cloud’s we see many results of the rhythm method.”

He had a pamphlet printed, in the plainest block letters:

COMMON MISUSES OF THE PROPHYLACTIC

He wrote as if he were writing for children; in some cases, he was.

1. SOME MEN PUT THE PROPHYLACTIC ON JUST THE TIP OF THE PENIS: THIS IS A
MISTAKE, BECAUSE THE PROPHYLACTIC WILL COME OFF. IT MUST BE PUT OVER THE
WHOLE PENIS, AND IT MUST BE PUT ON WHEN THE PENIS IS ERECT.

2. SOME MEN TRY TO USE THE PROPHYLACTIC A SECOND TIME: THIS IS ALSO A
MISTAKE. ONCE YOU REMOVE A PROPHYLACTIC, THROW IT AWAY! AND WASH YOUR
GENITAL AREA THOROUGHLY BEFORE ALLOWING YOURSELF FURTHER CONTACT
WITH YOUR PARTNER—SPERM ARE LIVING THINGS (AT LEAST, FOR A SHORT TIME),
AND THEY CAN SWIM!

3. SOME MEN TAKE THE PROPHYLACTIC OUT OF ITS WRAPPER: THEY EXPOSE THE
RUBBER TO LIGHT AND AIR FOR TOO LONG A TIME BEFORE USING IT;
CONSEQUENTLY, THE RUBBER DRIES OUT AND IT DEVELOPS CRACKS AND HOLES.

THIS IS A MISTAKE! SPERM ARE VERY TINY—THEY CAN SWIM THROUGH CRACKS
AND HOLES!

4. SOME MEN STAY INSIDE THEIR PARTNERS FOR A LONG TIME AFTER THEY HAVE
EJACULATED; WHAT A MISTAKE THIS IS! THE PENIS SHRINKS! WHEN THE PENIS IS NO
LONGER ERECT, AND WHEN THE MAN FINALLY PULLS HIS PENIS OUT OF HIS
PARTNER, THE PROPHYLACTIC CAN SLIDE COMPLETELY OFF. MOST MEN CAN’T EVEN
FEEL THIS HAPPENING, BUT WHAT A MESS! INSIDE THE WOMAN YOU HAVE JUST
DEPOSITED A WHOLE PROPHYLACTIC, AND ALL THOSE SPERM!

And some men, Homer Wells could have added—thinking of Herb Fowler

—distribute prophylactics with holes in them to their fellow man.

In the cider house at Ocean View, huddled with the huddled mice, Homer

Wells and Candy Kendall could not move from their embrace. For one thing,
the mattress was so narrow—it was only possible to share that mattress if they
remained joined together—and for another, they had waited so long; they had
anticipated so much. And, to both of them, so much was meant by having
allowed themselves to come together. They shared both a love and a grief, for
neither of them would have permitted each other this moment if there were
not at least parts of each of them that had accepted Wally’s death. And, after
lovemaking, those parts of them that felt Wally’s loss were forced to
acknowledge the moment with reverence and with solemnity; therefore, their
expressions were not so full of rapture and not so void of worry as the
expressions of most lovers after lovemaking.

Homer Wells, with his face pressed into Candy’s hair, lay dreaming that he

was only now arriving at the white Cadillac’s original destination; he felt as if
Wally were still driving him and Candy away from St. Cloud’s—as if Wally
were still in charge; surely Wally was a true benefactor to have driven him
safely to this resting place. The pulse in Candy’s temple, which lightly
touched his own pulse, was as soothing to Homer as the tire hum when the
great white Cadillac had rescued him from the prison into which he was born.
There was a tear on Homer’s face; he would have thanked Wally, if he could.

And if, in the darkness, he could have seen Candy’s face, he would have

known that a part of her was still over Burma.

They lay still for so long—the first mouse bold enough to run across their

bare legs surprised them. Homer Wells jerked up to a kneeling position; a
moment passed before he realized that he had left a whole prophylactic, and
all those sperm inside Candy. It was number 4 on Wilbur Larch’s list of the
COMMON MISUSES OF THE PROPHYLACTIC.

“Oh-oh,” said Homer Wells, whose fingers were quick, and sensitive, and

trained; he needed only the index and middle fingers of his right hand to
retrieve the lost rubber; although he was very fast, he doubted he’d been fast

enough.

Despite the careful detail of Homer’s instructions to Candy, she cut him off.

“I think I know how to douche myself, Homer,” she said.

between them, ended in the haste typical of the measures taken to avoid an
unwanted pregnancy—the possible cause of which was fairly typical, too.

fervor and anger in Candy’s good-night kiss, both ferocity and resignation in
the way she clutched his hands. Homer stood for a while in the parking lot
behind the lobster pound; the only sound was the aeration device that
circulated fresh oxygen through the water tank that kept the lobsters alive.
The quality of the air in the parking lot was divided between brine and motor
oil. The night’s heat was gone. A cool, damp fog rolled in from the sea; there
was no more heat lightning to illuminate, however slightly, the view across
the Atlantic.

his life, and now there was something else to wait and see about.

Wilbur Larch, who was seventy-something and the grand master of Maine in
the field of waiting and seeing, gazed once again upon the starry ceiling of the
dispensary. One of ether’s pleasures was its occasional transportation of the
inhaler to a position that afforded him a bird’s-eye view of himself; Wilbur
Larch was thus permitted to smile from afar upon a vision of himself. It was
the night that he blessed the adoption of young Copperfield, the lisper.

“Let us be happy for young Copperfield,” Dr. Larch had said. “Young

Copperfield has found a family. Good night, Copperfield!”

Only this time, in ether’s memory, it was a joyous occasion. There was even

unison in the responses, as if Larch conducted a choir of angels—all singing
Copperfield merrily on his way. It hadn’t been like that. Copperfield had been
especially popular with the littlest orphans; he was what Nurse Angela called
a “binder”—in his good-natured, lisping presence, the spirits of the other
orphans rose and held together. That night no one had joined Larch in wishing
Copperfield good night and good-bye. But Copperfield’s departure had been
especially hard for Dr. Larch, because with Copperfield’s passing there went
from St. Cloud’s not only the last orphan to be named by Homer Wells but
also the last orphan to have known Homer. With Copperfield’s leaving, a little
more of Homer Wells left, too. Little Steerforth—second-born and second-
named—had been adopted first.

But good for ether! How it allowed Dr. Larch to revise his history. Perhaps it

had been the ether, all along, that had provided Dr. Larch with the impulse to

be a revisionist with Fuzzy Stone. And in Larch’s ether dreams he had many
times rescued Wally Worthington—the exploding plane had reassembled
itself and returned to the sky; the parachute had opened, and the gentle
currents of the Burmese air had borne Wally all the way to China. Safely
above the Japanese, above the tigers and the snakes, and above the dread
diseases of Asia—how peacefully Wilbur Larch had seen Wally fly. And how
the Chinese had been impressed with Wally’s noble good looks—with those
patrician bones in that handsome face. In time, the Chinese would help Wally
to find his base, and he would come home to his girlfriend—this was what
Wilbur Larch wanted most: he wanted Wally back with Candy, for only then
would there be any hope of Homer Wells returning to St. Cloud’s.

Nearly three months after Wally’s plane was shot down, the harvest at Ocean
View began and Candy Kendall knew she was pregnant. After all, she was
familiar with the symptoms; so was Homer Wells.

A ragtag crew of pickers mauled the orchards that year; there were

housewives and war brides falling out of trees, and students dismissed from
the local schools so that they might contribute to the harvest. Even the apple
harvest in 194_ was considered a part of the war effort. Olive made Homer a
crew boss of the high school kids, whose methods of bruising the fruit were
so various that Homer was kept very busy.

Candy worked in the mart; she told Olive that her frequent bouts of nausea

were probably caused by the smell of diesel fuel and exhaust that was
constant around the farm vehicles. Olive remarked that she thought the
daughter of a mechanic and lobsterman would be less sensitive to strong
odors, and when she suggested that Candy might be more comfortable
working in the fields, Candy admitted that climbing trees also made her feel
queasy.

“I never knew you were so delicate,” Olive said. Olive had never been more

active in a harvest, or more grateful for there being one. But the harvest that
year reminded Homer Wells of learning to tread water; both Candy and Olive
had taught him how. (“Swimming in place,” Olive had called it.)

“I’m just swimming in place,” Homer told Candy. “We can’t leave Olive

during the harvest.”

“If I work as hard as I can,” Candy told him, “it’s possible that I’ll

miscarry.”

It was not very possible, Homer Wells knew.
“What if I don’t want you to miscarry?” Homer asked her.
“What if?” Candy asked.
“What if I want you to marry me, and to have the baby?” Homer asked.

at the head of the line of women who sized and sorted the apples—who either
packaged them or banished them to cider. Candy was retching, even though
she had chosen the head of the line because that put her nearest the open door.

“We have to wait and see,” Candy said between retches.
“We don’t have long to wait,” said Homer Wells. “We don’t have long to

see.”

marry you, but what about Olive? We have to wait.”

“The baby won’t wait,” Homer said.
“We both know where to go—to not have the baby,” Candy said.
“Or to have it,” said Homer Wells. “It’s my baby, too.”
“How do I have a baby without anyone knowing I’ve had it?” Candy asked;

she retched again, and Big Dot Taft came up the packing line to see what was
the matter.

Big Dot asked him. She put her huge arm around Candy’s shoulder. “You get
away from the door, darlin’,” Big Dot Taft said to Candy. “You come on and
work down the line—there’s only apples to smell down there. The tractor
exhaust comes in the door.”

“I’ll see you soon,” Homer mumbled, to both Candy and Big Dot.
“No one likes to be sick around the opposite sex, Homer,” Big Dot informed

him.

“Right,” said Homer Wells, orphan and would-be father.
In Maine, it is considered wiser just to know something than to talk about it;

that no one said Candy Kendall was pregnant didn’t necessarily mean that
they didn’t know she was. In Maine, it is a given that any boy can get any girl
in trouble. What they do about it is their business; if they want advice, they
should ask.

A Brief History of St. Cloud’s. “An orphan, or an abortion?”

asked her. “How about you?”

“I’d have the orphan,” Homer had said.
“You’re just a dreamer, Sunshine,” Melony had told him.
Now he supposed it was true; he was just a dreamer. He confused the high

school kids with each other, and gave some of them credit for picking bushels
that other kids had picked. He stopped two of the boys from throwing apples
at each other, and felt that he had to make an example of them—in order to
protect the fruit and establish his authority. But while he was driving the boys

back to the apple mart, where he forced them to wait without getting in any
trouble—and to miss a morning’s picking—a full-scale apple fight broke out
among the other high school kids, and when Homer returned to the field, he
interrupted a war. The crates that were already loaded on the flatbed were
splattered with apple seeds, and the hot parts of the tractor gave off a burned-
apple stench (someone must have tried to use the tractor for “cover”). Perhaps
Vernon Lynch would have made a better foreman for the high school kids,
Homer thought. All Homer wanted to do was to make things right with
Candy.

didn’t sit for long—it was getting cold. They sat huddled against one of the
posts at the dock’s end, where Ray had seen Candy sit with Wally—so many
times—and in somewhat the same position (although, Ray noted, Wally had
always sat up straighter, as if he were already fastened to the pilot’s seat).

process of falling in love, but he felt sorry for them; he knew that falling in
love was never meant to be such a morose moment. Yet Ray had every
respect for Olive, and it was for Olive, he knew, that Homer and Candy were
forced to be mourners at their own love story. “You should just go away,” Ray
said out the window to Homer and Candy; he spoke very softly and the
window was closed.

Homer was afraid that if he insisted to Candy that she marry him—insisted

that she have their baby—that he would force her to reject him completely.
He also knew that Candy was afraid of Olive; it was not that Candy was so
eager to have a second abortion—Homer knew that Candy would marry him,
and have their baby on the same day, if she thought she could avoid telling
Olive the truth. Candy was not ashamed of Homer; she was not ashamed of
being pregnant, either. Candy was ashamed that Olive would judge her
harshly for her insufficient feelings for Wally—Candy’s faith (in Wally being
alive) had not been as strong as Olive’s. It is not unusual for the mother of an
only son and the young woman who is the son’s lover to envision themselves
as competitors.

More shocking (to Homer’s mind) was what he could gather of his own

feelings. He already knew that he loved Candy, and wanted her; now he
discovered that—more than wanting her—he wanted her child.

They were just another trapped couple, more comfortable with their illusions

than they were with the reality of their situation.

say that they need me there. It’s probably true, anyway. And because of the
war, no one else is paying attention to them. You could tell your dad it’s just

another kind of war effort. We could both tell Olive that we feel an obligation
—to be where we’re really needed; to be of more use.”

“You want me to have the baby?” Candy asked him.
“I want you to have our baby,” said Homer Wells. “And after the baby’s

born, and you’re both recovered, we’ll come back here. We’ll tell your dad,
and Olive—or we’ll write them—that we’ve fallen in love, and that we’ve
gotten married.”

“And that we conceived a child before we did any of that?” Candy asked.
Homer Wells, who saw the real stars above the blackened coast of Maine—

bright and cold—envisioned the whole story very clearly. “We’ll say the baby
is adopted,” he said. “We’ll say we felt a further obligation—to the
orphanage. I do feel that, in a way, anyway,” he added.

orphan?”

just say it’s adopted—just for Olive’s sake, and just for a while.”

“That’s lying,” Candy said.
“Right,” said Homer Wells. “That’s lying for a while.”
“Maybe—when we came back, with the baby—maybe we wouldn’t have to

say it was adopted. Maybe we could tell the truth then,” Candy said.

He put his mouth on the back of her neck; he nuzzled into her hair.

“If we thought that Olive could accept it, if we thought that she could accept

—about Wally,” Candy added, “then we wouldn’t have to lie about the baby
being adopted, would we?”

wondered, holding Candy tightly as she softly cried. Was it true that Wilbur
Larch had no memory of Homer’s mother? Was it true that Nurse Angela and
Nurse Edna had no memory of his mother, either? Maybe it was true, but
Homer Wells would never have blamed them if they had lied; they would
have lied only to protect him. And if they’d remembered his mother, and his
mother was a monster, wasn’t it better that they’d lied? To orphans, not every
truth is wanted.

prolonged suffering—if Wally had been tortured, or had burned to death, or
had been eaten by an animal—Homer certainly would have lied about that. If
Homer Wells had been an amateur historian, he would have been as much of a
revisionist as Wilbur Larch—he would have tried to make everything come
out all right in the end. Homer Wells, who always said to Wilbur Larch that he
(Larch) was the doctor, was more of a doctor than he knew.

The first night of cider making he shared the work of the press and grinder
with Meany Hyde and Everett Taft; Big Dot and her kid sister, Debra
Pettigrew, were the bottlers. Debra was sullen at the prospect of messy work;
she complained about the slopping and the spilling, and her irritation was
further enhanced by the presence of Homer Wells, to whom she had not been
speaking—Debra’s understanding that Candy and Homer had become
partners in a certain grief was markedly colored by her suspicion that Candy
and Homer had become partners in a certain pleasure, too. At least Debra had
not reacted generously to Homer’s suggestion that they just be friends. Homer
was puzzled by Debra’s hostility, and assumed that his years in the orphanage
had deprived him of some perfectly sensible explanation for her behavior. It
seemed to Homer that Debra had always denied him access to anything more
than her friendship. Why was she now incensed that he asked no more of her
than that?

Meany Hyde announced to Homer and Everett Taft that this would be his

first and last night press of the harvest because he wanted to stay home with
Florence—“Now that her time is approachin’,” Meany said.

When Mr. Rose pressed cider, there was a very different feeling in the

fermented air. For one thing, everything went more quickly; the pressing was
a kind of contest. For another, there was a tension that Mr. Rose’s authority
created—and the knowledge of those tired men asleep, or trying to sleep, in
the next room, lent to the working of the grinder and the press a sense of
hurry (and of perfection) that one feels only on the edge of exhaustion.

she got; there was a matching slope in the sisters’ shoulders, and even a
slackness in the backs of Debra’s arms that would one day yield the massive
jiggles that shivered through Big Dot. In sisterly imitation, they wiped the
sweat from their eyes with their biceps—not wanting to touch their faces with
their cider-sweet and sticky hands.

gone, Meany Hyde said, “That Missus Worthington is a thoughtful woman—
here she is not only bringin’ us somethin’ but givin’ us a choice.”

thought of us.”

move out of its way. Life was finally about to happen to him—the journey he
proposed making, back to St. Cloud’s, was actually going to give him his
freedom from St. Cloud’s. He would have a baby (if not a wife, too); he
would need a job.

apple trees would satisfy St. Cloud’s, as if his planting them would satisfy
what Wilbur Larch wanted from him.

By the end of the harvest, the light grew grayer and the orchards were darker

in the daytime, although more light passed through the empty trees. The
picking crew’s inexperience was visible in the shriveled apples still clinging
to the hard-to-reach limbs. The ground was already frozen in St. Cloud’s.
Homer would have to make a special trip for the baby trees. He would plant
them in the spring; it would be a spring baby.

Homer and Candy worked only the night shifts at Cape Kenneth Hospital

now. The days when Ray was building the torpedoes were the days Homer
could spend with Candy, in her room above the lobster pound.

pregnant. Although she could not tell him—not yet—Candy loved making
love to Homer Wells; she enjoyed herself much more than she had been able
to with Wally. But she could not bring herself to say aloud that anything was
better than with Wally; although making love was better with Homer, she
doubted that this was Wally’s fault. She and Wally had never had the time to
feel so free.

have my baby—neither an abortion nor an orphan.”

“A wanted baby!” Nurse Angela said. “We’re going to have a wanted baby!”
“If not a planned one,” said Wilbur Larch, who stared out the window of

Nurse Angela’s office as if the hill that rose outside the window had
personally risen against him. “And I suppose he’s going to plant the damn
trees,” said Dr. Larch. “What does he want a baby for? How can he have a
baby and go to college—or to medical school?”

“When was he ever going to go to medical school, Wilbur?” Nurse Edna

asked.

“I knew he’d be back!” Nurse Angela shouted. “He belongs with us!”
“Yes, he does,” said Wilbur Larch. Involuntarily, and somewhat stiffly, his

back straightened, his knees braced, his arms reached out and the fingers of
his hands partially opened—as if he were preparing to receive a heavy
package. Nurse Edna shuddered to see him in such a pose, which reminded
her of the fetus from Three Mile Falls, that dead baby whose posture of such
extreme supplication had been arranged by Homer Wells.

Homer said to Olive Worthington: “I hate to leave, especially with Christmas
coming, and all those memories—but there is something, and someone, I’ve
been neglecting. It’s really all of them at Saint Cloud’s—nothing changes
there. They always need the same things, and now that there’s a war, and

everyone is making an effort for the war, I think Saint Cloud’s is more
forgotten than ever. And Doctor Larch isn’t getting any younger. I should be
of more use than I am here. With the harvest over, I don’t feel I have enough
to do. At Saint Cloud’s, there’s always too much to do.”

head. He remembered what Mr. Rochester said to Jane Eyre:

poison of life.”

not done her hair or put her makeup on. The gray in the light, and in her face
and in her hair, made Mrs. Worthington look older to Homer. She was using
the string of her tea bag to wring the last of the tea from the bag, and Homer
could not raise his eyes from the ropy, knotted veins in the backs of her hands.
She had always smoked too much, and in the morning she always coughed.

“Candy is coming with me,” said Homer Wells.
“Candy is a fine young woman,” Olive said. “It is most unselfish of you

both—when you could be enjoying yourselves—to give comfort and
companionship to unwanted children.” The string across the belly of the tea
bag was so taut that Homer thought it would slice through the bag. Olive’s
voice was so formal that she might have been speaking at an awards
ceremony describing the heroism that was worthy of prizes. She was trying
her hardest not to cough. When the string tore the tea bag, some of the wet
leaves stuck to the yolk of her uneaten soft-boiled egg, which was perched in
a china egg cup that Homer Wells had once mistaken for a candlestick holder.

“I could never thank you enough for everything you’ve done for me,”

Homer said. Olive Worthington just shook her head; her shoulders were
squared, her chin was up, the straightness of her back was formidable. “I’m so
sorry about Wally,” said Homer Wells. There was the slightest movement in
Olive’s throat, but the muscles of her neck were rigid.

“He’s just missing,” Olive said.
“Right,” said Homer Wells. He put his hand on Olive’s shoulder. She gave

no indication that the presence of his hand was either a burden or a comfort,
but after they remained like that for a while, she turned her face enough to
rest her cheek on top of his hand; there they remained for a while longer, as if
posing for a painter of the old school—or for a photographer who was waiting
for the unlikely: for the November sun to come out.

Olive insisted that he take the white Cadillac.
“Well,” Ray said to Candy and to Homer, “I think it’s good for you both that

leaving the lobster pound parking lot, Ray called out to them: “And try havin’
some fun together!” Somehow, he doubted that they had heard him.

Who goes to St. Cloud’s to have fun?
I have not really been adopted, thought Homer Wells. I am not really

betraying Mrs. Worthington; she never said she was my mother. Even so,
Homer and Candy did not talk a lot on the drive.

had abandoned the trees; there was a little snow in Skowhegan, where the
ground resembled an old man’s face in need of a shave. There was more snow
in Blanchard and in East Moxie and in Moxie Gore, and they had to wait an
hour in Ten Thousand Acre Tract where a tree was down—across the road.
The snow had drifted over the tree, the smashed shape of which resembled a
toppled dinosaur. In Moose River and in Misery Gore, and in Tomhegan, too,
the snow had come to stay. The drifts along the roadside were shorn so
sharply by the plow—and they stood so high—that Candy and Homer could
detect the presence of a house only by chimney smoke, or by the narrow paths
chopped through the drifts that were here and there stained by the territorial
pissing of dogs.

Olive and Ray and Meany Hyde had given them extra gas coupons. They

had decided to take the car because they thought that it would be nice to have
a means to get away from St. Cloud’s—if only for short drives—but by the
time they reached Black Rapids and Homer had put the chains on the rear
tires, they realized that the winter roads (and this was only the beginning of
the winter) would make most driving impossible.

bringing the car. He would have said that no one comes to St. Cloud’s for the
purpose of taking little trips away from it; he would have suggested, for fun,
that they could always take the train to Three Mile Falls.

With the bad roads and the failing light and the snow that began to fall after

Ellenville, it was already dark when they reached St. Cloud’s. The headlights
of the white Cadillac, climbing the hill past the girls’ division, illuminated two
women walking down the hill toward the railroad station—their faces turning
away from the light. Their footing looked unsure; one of them didn’t have a
scarf; the other one didn’t have a hat; the snow winked in the headlights as if
the women were throwing diamonds in the air.

a ride?” he asked the women.

“You’re goin’ the wrong way,” one of them said.
“I could turn around!” he called to them. When they walked on without

and turned out the headlights. The snow falling in front of the light in the
dispensary was the same kind of snow that had been falling the night that he
arrived in St. Cloud’s after his escape from the Drapers in Waterville.

There had been something of a brouhaha between Larch and his nurses

about where Homer and Candy would sleep. Larch assumed that Candy
would sleep in the girls’ division and that Homer would sleep where he used
to sleep, with the other boys, but the women reacted strongly to this
suggestion.

“They’re lovers!” Nurse Edna pointed out. “Surely they sleep together!”
“Well, surely they have,” Larch said. “That doesn’t mean that they have to

sleep together here.”

“Homer said he was going to marry her,” Nurse Edna pointed out.
“Going to,” grumbled Wilbur Larch.
“I think it would be nice to have someone sleeping with someone else here,”

Nurse Angela said.

“It seems to me,” said Wilbur Larch, “that we’re in business because there’s

entirely too much sleeping together.”

“They’re lovers!” Nurse Edna repeated indignantly.
And so the women decided it. Candy and Homer would share a room with

two beds on the ground floor of the girls’ division; how they arranged the
beds was their own business. Mrs. Grogan said that she liked the idea of
having a man in the girls’ division; occasionally, the girls complained of a
prowler or a peeping tom; having a man around at night was a good idea.

each other.”

“We all sleep alone over here,” Dr. Larch said.
“Well, Wilbur,” Nurse Edna said, “don’t be so proud of it.”

Olive Worthington, alone in Wally’s room, regarded the two beds, Homer’s
and Wally’s—both beds were freshly made up, both pillows were without a
crease. On the night table between their beds was a photograph of Candy
teaching Homer how to swim. Because there was no ashtray in the boys’
room, Olive held her free hand in a cupped position under the long, dangling
ash of her cigarette.

Raymond Kendall, alone above the lobster pound, viewed the triptych of

photographs that stood like an altarpiece on his night table, next to his socket
wrench set. The middle photograph was of himself as a young man; he was
seated in an uncomfortable-looking chair, his wife was in his lap; she was
pregnant with Candy; the chair was in apparent danger. The left-hand
photograph was Candy’s graduation picture, the right-hand photograph was of

Candy with Wally—their tennis racquets pointed at each other, like guns. Ray
had no picture of Homer Wells; he needed only to look out the window at his
dock in order to imagine Homer clearly; Ray could not look at his dock and
think of Homer Wells without hearing the snails rain upon the water.

had put the disappointing pot roast in the instrument sterilizer, which she
checked from time to time. Mrs. Grogan, who was praying in the girls’
division, did not see the Cadillac come up the hill. Nurse Angela was in the
delivery room, shaving a woman who had already broken her bag of waters.

peeked into Nurse Angela’s empty office. Homer knew better than to peek
into the delivery room when the light was on. From the dormitory, they could
hear Dr. Larch’s reading voice. Although Candy held tightly to his hand,
Homer Wells was inclined to hurry—in order not to miss the bedtime story.

Meany Hyde’s wife, Florence, was delivered of a healthy baby boy—nine
pounds, two ounces—shortly after Thanksgiving, which Olive Worthington
and Raymond Kendall celebrated in a fairly formal and quiet fashion at Ocean
View. Olive invited all her apple workers for an open house; she asked Ray to
help her host the occasion. Meany Hyde insisted to Olive that his new baby
was a definite sign that Wally was alive.

“Yes, I know he’s alive,” Olive told Meany calmly.
It was not too trying a day for her, but she did find Debra Pettigrew sitting

on Homer’s bed in Wally’s room, staring at the photograph of Candy teaching
Homer how to swim. And not long after ushering Debra from the room, Olive
discovered Grace Lynch sitting in the same dent Debra had made on Homer’s
bed. Grace, however, was staring at the questionnaire from the board of
trustees at St. Cloud’s, the one that Homer had never filled out and had left
tacked to the wall of Wally’s room as if they were unwritten rules.

And Big Dot Taft broke down in the kitchen while telling Olive about one of

her dreams. Everett had found her, in her sleep, dragging herself across the
bedroom floor toward the bathroom. “I didn’t have no legs,” Big Dot told
Olive. “It was the night Florence’s boy was born, and I woke up without no
legs—only I didn’t really wake up, I was just dreamin’ that there was nothin’
left of me, below the waist.”

“Except that you had to go to the bathroom,” Everett Taft pointed out.

“Otherwise, why was you crawlin’ on the floor?”

“The important thing was that I was injured,” Big Dot told her husband

crossly.

“Oh,” said Everett Taft.

Big Dot had a dream that she couldn’t walk. Don’tcha see, Olive?” Meany
asked. “I think God is tellin’ us that Wally is okay—that he’s alive—but that
he’s been hurt.”

“He’s injured, or somethin’,” Big Dot said, bursting into tears.
“Of course,” Olive said abruptly. “It’s what I’ve always thought.” Her words

startled them all—even Ray Kendall. “If he weren’t injured, we would have
heard from him by now. And if he weren’t alive, I’d know it,” Olive said. She
handed her handkerchief to Big Dot Taft and lit a fresh cigarette from the butt
end of the cigarette she had almost finished.

as good, but everyone had a good time. In lieu of balloons, Dr. Larch
distributed prophylactics to Nurse Angela and Nurse Edna, who—despite
their distate for the job—inflated the rubbers and dipped them in bowls of
green and red food coloring. When the coloring dried, Mrs. Grogan painted
the orphans’ names on the rubbers, and Homer and Candy hid the brightly
colored prophylactics all over the orphanage.

Easter. Eggs are expensive.”

“We’ll not give up eggs for Easter, Wilbur,” Nurse Edna said indignantly.
“I suppose not,” Dr. Larch said tiredly.
Olive Worthington had sent a case of champagne. Wilbur Larch had never

drunk a drop of champagne before—he was not a drinker—but the way the
bubbles tightened the roof of his mouth, opened his nasal passages and made
his eyes feel dry but clear reminded him of that lightest of vapors, of that
famous inhalation he was addicted to. He drank and drank. He even sang for
the children—something he’d heard the French soldiers sing in World War I.
That song was no more suitable for children than those prophylactics were,
but—because of an ignorance of French and an innocence of sex—the French
song (which was filthier than any limerick Wally Worthington would ever
know) was mistaken for a pleasing ditty and the green and red rubbers were
mistaken for balloons.

Even Nurse Edna got a little drunk; champagne was new to her, too,

although she sometimes put sherry in hot soup. Nurse Angela didn’t drink,
but she became emotional—to the degree that she threw her arms around
Homer’s neck and kissed him mightily, all the while proclaiming that the
spirit of St. Cloud’s had been in a noticeable slump during Homer’s absence
and that Homer had been sent by a clearly sympathetic God to revive them.

“But Homer’s not staying,” Wilbur Larch said, hiccuping.
They had all been impressed with Candy, whom even Dr. Larch referred to

as “our angelic volunteer,” and over whom Mrs. Grogan daily fussed as if
Candy were her daughter. Nurse Edna busied herself around the young lovers
the way a moth flaps around a light.

saw such a pretty girl who was willing to give enemas,” Larch said, patting
Candy’s knee.

“I’m not squeamish,” Candy told him.
“There’s no room for squeamishness here,” Larch said, burping.
“There’s still a little room for sensitivity, I hope,” Nurse Angela complained.

Larch had never praised her or Nurse Edna for their willingness to give
enemas.

back and relieve me here,” Wilbur Larch told Candy in a loud voice—as if
Homer weren’t sitting right across the table. Larch patted Candy’s knee again.
“But that’s all right!” he said. “Who wouldn’t rather get a girl like you
pregnant—and grow apples!” He said something in French and drank another
glass of champagne. “Of course,” he whispered to Candy, “he doesn’t need to
go to medical school to be a doctor here. There’s just a few more procedures
he ought to be familiar with. Hell!” Larch said, indicating the orphans eating
their turkey—each with a colored rubber, like a name tag, stationed in front of
his or her plate, “this isn’t a bad place to raise a family. And if Homer ever
gets around to planting the damn hillside, then you’ll get to grow apples here,
too.”

When Dr. Larch fell asleep at the table, Homer Wells carried him back to the

dispensary. In his time away from St. Cloud’s, Homer wondered, had Dr.
Larch gone completely crazy? There was no one to ask. Mrs. Grogan, Nurse
Edna, and especially Nurse Angela might agree that Larch had traveled
around the bend—that he had one oar out of the water, as Ray Kendall would
say; that he had one wheel in the sand, as Wally used to say—but Mrs.
Grogan and the nurses would most emphatically defend Dr. Larch. Their
view, Homer could tell, was that Homer had left them for too long, that his
judgment was rusty. Fortunately, Homer’s obstetrical procedure had not
suffered from his absence.

times, but they run. It was after six in the evening when the woman arrived in
St. Cloud’s; although it was not his usual practice, the stationmaster escorted
her to the hospital entrance because the woman was already engaged in the
second stage of labor—her membranes were ruptured, and her bearing-down
pains were at regular intervals. Homer Wells was palpating the baby’s head
through the perineum when Nurse Angela informed him that Dr. Larch was

too drunk to be aroused, and Nurse Edna had also fallen asleep. Homer was
concerned that the perineum showed signs of bulging, and the woman’s
response to a rather heavy ether sedation was quite slow.

Homer was obliged to hold back the infant’s head in order to protect the

perineum from tearing; the mediolateral incision, which Homer elected to
perform, was made at a point corresponding to seven on the face of a clock. It
was a safer episotomy, in Homer’s view, because the cut could, if necessary,
be carried back considerably farther than the midline type of operation.

neck of the child to see if the umbilical cord was coiled there, but it was an
easy birth, both shoulders emerging spontaneously. He applied two ligatures
to the umbilical and cut the cord between the two. He still had his surgical
gown on when he went to the dispensary to see how Dr. Larch was recovering
from his Thanksgiving Day champagne. If Larch was familiar with the
transitions he encountered in moving from a world of ether to a world without
anesthesia, he was unfamiliar with the transition between drunkenness and
hangover. Seeing Homer Wells in the bloody smock of his business, Wilbur
Larch imagined he was saved.

congratulatory formality famous among colleagues in the medical profession.

“Doctor Who?” said Homer Wells.
“Doctor Stone,” said Wilbur Larch, withdrawing his hand, his hangover

settling on him—a dust so thick on the roof of his mouth that he could only
repeat himself. “Fuzzy Stone, Fuzzy Stone, Fuzzy Stone.”

given them in their room in the girls’ division. “Why would Doctor Larch say
that you don’t need to go to medical school to be a doctor here?”

Wells. “So what’s the point of being a legitimate doctor?”

“But no one would hire you if you weren’t a legitimate doctor, would they?”

Candy asked.

“Maybe Doctor Larch would,” said Homer Wells. “I know some things.”
“You don’t want to be a doctor here, anyway—do you?” Candy asked.
“That’s right, I don’t want to,” he said. What is all this about Fuzzy Stone?

he was wondering as he fell asleep.

and examined the episiotomy. Nurse Angela was telling him about it, stitch by
stitch, but although Larch appreciated the description, it wasn’t really
necessary; the look and feel of the woman’s healthy tissue told him
everything he wanted to know. Homer Wells had not lost his confidence; he

still had the correct touch.

Wells had no doubts to soften his contempt for people who’d bungled their
lives so badly that they didn’t want the children they’d conceived. Wilbur
Larch would have told him that he was simply an arrogant, young doctor
who’d never been sick—that he was guilty of a young doctor’s disease,
manifesting a sick superiority toward all patients. But Homer was wielding an
ideal of marriage and family like a club; he was more sure of the rightness of
his goal than a couple celebrating their sixty-fifth wedding anniversary.

with Candy would hover like a halo above the young couple and shed a
conspicuously forgiving light upon them and their child when they returned to
Heart’s Haven and Heart’s Rock. He must have thought that the goodness of
his and Candy’s intentions would glow with such a powerful radiance that
Olive and Ray and the rest of that all-knowing, say-nothing community would
be blinded. Homer and Candy must have envisioned that their child—
conceived in a moment of love that overshadowed Wally’s being lost or dead
or “just missing”—would be greeted as a descending angel.

Cloud’s. Never had being of use been such good fun. There was no chore the
lovely and growingly pregnant young woman thought herself to be above; her
beauty and her physical energy were inspiring to the girls in the girls’
division. Dr. Larch devoted himself to teaching Homer more about pediatrics
—since he could find no fault with Homer’s obstetrical procedure and since
Homer was emphatic about his refusal to participate in the abortions. The
rigidity of this latter position perplexed even Candy, who was fond of saying
to Homer, “Just explain it to me again—how you’re not disapproving of the
procedure, but that you will not yourself be party to what you feel is wrong.”

nothing else to explain. I think an abortion should be available to anyone who
wants one, but I never want to perform one. What’s hard to understand about
that?”

it’s wrong, yet you think it should be legal—right?”

“Right,” said Homer Wells. “I think it’s wrong, but I also think it should be

everyone’s personal choice. What could be more personal than deciding
whether you want a child or not?”

Wells had “decided” that Wally was dead—which seemed especially personal
to her.

beds together and attempted to make them up as if they were one big bed—a
problem, since there were no double-bed sheets at St. Cloud’s.

Candy, but she had no money of her own to buy them and she wondered if
purchasing them for the orphanage would seem strange. “Very strange,”
Larch said, vetoing the idea.

Larch in A Brief History of St. Cloud’s. “Here in St. Cloud’s we do without—
we just do without.”

presents, and Candy’s example—as the first happily pregnant woman in any
of their memories—was a present to them all. They had a turkey and a ham,
and Dr. Larch and Homer Wells had a carving contest, which everyone said
Homer won. He finished carving the turkey before Larch finished carving the
ham.

pleased with Homer’s knife work. That Homer had learned his touch for
cutting under circumstances different from Mr. Rose’s was often on Homer’s
mind. Given certain advantages of education, Homer thought, Mr. Rose might
have made an excellent surgeon.

“Might have made,” Homer mumbled to himself. He had never been

happier.

He was of use, he was in love—and was loved—and he was expecting a

child. What more is there? he thought, making the daily rounds. Other people
may look for a break from routine, but an orphan craves daily life.

In midwinter, in a blizzard, when the women were having tea in the girls’
division with Mrs. Grogan and Dr. Larch was at the railroad station,
personally accusing the stationmaster of losing an expected delivery of sulfa,
a woman arrived at the hospital entrance, bent double with cramps and
bleeding. She’d had the D without the C, as Nurse Caroline would have
observed; whoever had managed the dilatation appeared to have managed it
safely. What was required now was a completion curettage, which Homer
performed alone. One very small piece of the products of conception was
recognizable in the scraping, which caused Homer Wells a single, small
thought. About four months, was what he estimated—looking quickly at the
piece, and quickly throwing it away.

At night, when he touched Candy without waking her up, he marveled at

how peacefully she slept; and he observed how life in St. Cloud’s seemed

timeless, placeless and constant, how it seemed grim but caring, how it
seemed somehow safer than life in Heart’s Rock or in Heart’s Haven—
certainly safer than life over Burma. That was the night he got up and went to
the boys’ division; perhaps he was looking for his history in the big room
where all the boys slept, but what he found instead was Dr. Larch kissing
every boy a late good night. Homer imagined then that Dr. Larch had kissed
him like that, when he’d been small; Homer could not have imagined how
those kisses, even now, were still kisses meant for him. They were kisses
seeking Homer Wells.

hillside—glazed with snow that had thawed and then refrozen into a thick
crust. Homer had stepped outside for just a minute; after witnessing the
kisses, he desired the bracing air. It was a Canada lynx—a dark, gunmetal
gray against the lighter gray of the moonlit snow, its wildcat stench so strong
Homer gagged to smell the thing. Its wildcat sense was keen enough to keep it
treading within a single leap’s distance of the safety of the woods. The lynx
was crossing the brow of the hill when it began to slide; its claws couldn’t
grip the crust of the snow, and the hill had suddenly grown steeper. The cat
moved from the dull moonlight into the sharper light from Nurse Angela’s
office window; it could not help its sideways descent. It traveled closer to the
orphanage than it would ever have chosen to come, its ferocious death smell
clashing with the freezing cold. The lynx’s helplessness on the ice had
rendered its expression both terrified and resigned; both madness and fatalism
were caught in the cat’s fierce, yellow eyes and in its involuntary, spitting
cough as it slid on, actually bumping against the hospital before its claws
could find a purchase on the crusted snow. It spit its rage at Homer Wells, as
if Homer had caused its unwilling descent.

with ice. The panicked animal tried to dash up the hill; it was less than
halfway up when it began to slide down again, drawn toward the orphanage
against its will. When it set out from the bottom of the hill a second time, the
lynx was panting; it ran diagonally uphill, slipping but catching itself, and
slipping again, finally escaping into the softer snow in the woods—nowhere
near where it had meant to go; yet the lynx would accept any route of escape
from the dark hospital.

Homer Wells, staring into the woods after the departed lynx, did not imagine

that he would ever leave St. Cloud’s more easily.

There was a false spring very early that March; all over Maine the river ice
buckled under the wet snow, the ponds split apart with gunshots sharp enough

to put birds to wing, and the bigger, inland lakes groaned and sang and
cracked like boxcars colliding in the station yards.

the Kennebec—its ice bending under a foot of slush and giving way with a
deep, gonging alarm that caused one of the older women in the boardinghouse
to sit up in her bed and howl. Melony was reminded of the nights in her bed
in the girls’ division in St. Cloud’s when the March ice was grinding
downriver from Three Mile Falls. She got out of bed and went into Lorna’s
room to talk, but Lorna was so sleepy that she wouldn’t get up; Melony got in
bed beside her friend. “It’s just the ice,” Lorna whispered. That was how she
and Melony became lovers, listening to the false spring.

“There’s just one thing,” Lorna said to Melony. “If we’re gonna be together,

you gotta stop lookin’ for this Homer character. Either you want me or you
want him.”

“I want you,” Melony told Lorna. “Just don’t ever leave me.”
A permanent couple, an orphan’s ideal; but Melony wondered where her

rage would go. If she stopped looking for Homer Wells, would she stop
thinking about him, too?

There was too much snow; the brief thaw never penetrated the frozen

ground, and when the temperature dropped and it snowed again, the rivers
hardened up fast. An old mill pond, behind the orphanage in St. Cloud’s,
became a trap for geese. Confused by the thaw, the geese landed on the slush
that they mistook for open water; the slush refroze at night and the geese’s
paddle feet were caught in it. When Homer Wells found the geese, they were
frozen statues of their former selves—dusted with the new snow, they were
stony guardians of the pond. There was nothing to do but chip them out of the
ice and scald them; they were easier to pluck because they were partially
frozen. When Mrs. Grogan roasted them—pricking them constantly, to bleed
their fat—she retained the sense that she was only warming them up before
sending them on their dangerous way.

It was already April by the time the ice broke free in Three Mile Falls and

the river overran its banks in St. Cloud’s; water filled the basement of the
former whore hotel and exerted such a force against the underbeams that the
saloon bar with its brass footrail fell through the floor and floated out and
away through a bulkhead. The stationmaster saw it go; as obsessed with
omens as he was, he slept two nights in a row in his office for fear that the
station house was in danger.

Candy was so huge she hardly slept at all. The morning that the hill was

before he could plant apple trees, but he dared not wait any longer before
making the trip to Heart’s Rock to get the trees. He didn’t want to be away
when Candy delivered.

one of the pickup trucks to transport the baby trees.

about ten percent Red Delicious, another ten or fifteen percent Cortlands and
Baldwins.”

Olive reminded him to throw in a few Northern Spies, and some

Gravensteins—for apple pie. She asked him how Candy was and why she
hadn’t come with him; he told her Candy was too busy. (Everyone liked her,
and the kids just hung on her.) It would be hard to leave, when the time came,
Homer confided to Olive; they were of so much use—they were so needed.
And the constancy of the demands—“Well, even a day off, like this, is hard to
squeeze in,” Homer said.

“You mean you won’t spend the night?” Olive asked.
“Too busy,” Homer said, “but we’ll both be back in time to put out the

bees.”

“That’ll be about Mother’s Day,” Olive observed.
“Right,” said Homer Wells; he kissed Olive, whose skin was cool and

smelled like ash.

Meany Hyde and Herb Fowler helped him load the pickup.
“You gonna plant a whole forty-by-forty by yourself?” Meany asked him.

“You better hope the ground unfreezes.”

your pecker don’t fall off.”

“How’s Candy?” Big Dot Taft asked Homer. Almost as big as you are,

Homer thought.

“Just fine,” he said. “But busy.”
“I’ll bet,” said Debra Pettigrew.
In the furnace room, under the lobster tank, Ray Kendall was building his

own torpedo.

“What for?” Homer asked.
“Just to see if I can do it,” Ray said.
“But what will you fire it at?” Homer asked. “And what will you fire it

from?”

“The hard part is the gyroscope,” Ray said. “It ain’t hard to fire it—what’s

hard is guidin’ it.”

“I don’t understand,” said Homer Wells.
“Well, look at you,” Ray said. “You’re plantin’ an apple orchard at an

orphanage. You been there five months, but my daughter’s too busy to visit
me for a day. I don’t understand everythin’, either.”

“We’ll be back about blossom time,” Homer said guiltily.
“That’s a nice time of year,” said Ray.
On the drive back to St. Cloud’s, Homer wondered if Ray’s coolness, or

evasiveness, was intentional. He decided that Ray’s message was clear: if you
keep things from me, I won’t explain myself to you.

“What for?”

“Wait and see,” said Homer Wells.
Dr. Larch helped him unload the trees.
“They’re kind of scrawny, aren’t they?” Larch asked.
“They won’t give much fruit for eight or ten years,” Homer said.
“Then I doubt I’ll get to eat any of it,” said Wilbur Larch.
“Well,” Homer said, “even before there are apples on the trees, think how

the trees will look on the hill.”

“They’ll look scrawny,” said Wilbur Larch.
Near the top of the hill the ground was still frozen; Homer couldn’t work his

spade down far enough. And at the bottom, the holes he dug filled with water
—the runoff from the snow that was still melting in the woods. Because he
would have to wait to plant the trees, he worried about the roots mildewing,
or getting savaged by mice—but mainly he was peeved that he could not
control, exactly, the calendar of his life. He’d wanted to plant the trees before
Candy delivered. He wanted the hillside entirely planted when the baby was
born.

Larch.

“Surgery is neat,” said Homer Wells.
It was the middle of April before Homer could dig the holes and plant the

forty-by-forty orchard—which he did in three days, his back so stiff at night
that he slept as restlessly and uncomfortably as Candy, tossing and turning
with her. It was the first warm night of the spring; they were much too hot
under the winter-weight blanket; when Candy broke water, they both, for a
second, confused the puddle with their sweat.

Homer helped her to the hospital entrance of the boys’ division. Nurse Edna

prepared Candy while Homer went to talk to Dr. Larch, who was waiting in
Nurse Angela’s office.

“I deliver this one,” Larch said. “There are certain advantages to

detachment. Fathers are a bother in the delivery room. If you want to be there,
just mind your own business.”

Larch smiled at him.

Homer had already put his mask on when he heard a commotion from the
boys’ sleeping room. He left the mask on when he went to investigate. One of
the John Larches or the Wilbur Walshes had got up and gone outside to pee
against a trash barrel—with considerable noise. This in turn had disturbed a
large raccoon, busy at the trash, and the coon had startled the peeing orphan
into wetting his pajamas. Homer tried to sort this out, calmly; he wanted to
get back to the delivery room.

“Candy’s having her baby, now.”

“What’s she havin’?” one of the boys asked.
“Either a boy or a girl,” said Homer Wells.
“What will you name it?” another one asked.
“Nurse Angela named me,” Homer said.
“Me, too!” several of them said.
“If it’s a girl, I’m naming her Angela,” said Homer Wells.
“And if it’s a boy?”
“If it’s a boy, I’ll name him Angel,” Homer said. “That’s really just Angela

without the last A.”

“Angel?” someone asked.
“Right,” said Homer Wells and kissed them all good night.
As he was leaving, someone asked him, “And will you leave it here?”
“No,” mumbled Homer Wells, having pulled his mask back up.
“What?” the orphans shouted.
“No,” Homer said more clearly, pulling down the mask.
It was hot in the delivery room. The warm weather had been unexpected;

because no one had put the screens on, Larch refused to open any windows.

her, Nurse Angela wept so hard that Larch insisted that she change her mask.
Nurse Edna was too short to reach the sweat on Larch’s forehead; she missed
some of it. As the baby’s head emerged, a drop of Larch’s sweat baptized the
child squarely on its temple—literally before it was entirely born—and
Homer Wells could not help thinking that this was not unlike David
Copperfield being born with a caul.

the chin and occupit in both hands and drew the infant downward until, in a
single, easy, upward motion, he delivered the posterior shoulder first. Homer
Wells, biting his lip, nodded his approval as the anterior shoulder—and the

rest of the child—followed.

ether smile. Nurse Angela, who had soaked through another mask, had to turn
away.

“Perfect!” Then, as he never before had done, he kissed Candy—albeit
through his mask—squarely between her wide-open, out-of-ether eyes.

not to relinquish the winter—and Homer looked at his newly planted apple
orchard with concern; the frail, snow-covered trees reminded him of the
luckless geese who’d made an ill-timed landing in the mill pond.

now.”

an abortion.

One week short of May, there was still too much snow in St. Cloud’s for it to
be mud season yet. Homer Wells had shaken the individual branches of each
of his apple trees; and mouse tracks around one particularly vulnerable-
looking Winter Banana had caused him to scatter poison oats and poison corn.
Every tree had a metal sleeve around its slender trunk. Deer had already
nibbled the row of Macs planted nearest the woods. Homer put out a salt lick
for the deer, deeper into the woods, in hopes that the salt would keep them
there.

Candy was nursing Angel, whose crusty remnant of an umbilical had fallen

off cleanly and whose circumcision had healed. Homer had circumcised his
son.

“You need the practice,” Dr. Larch had told him.
“You want me to practice on my son?” Homer had asked.
“May it be the only pain you ever cause him,” Wilbur Larch had replied.
There was still ice on the inside of the windowpanes in the morning. Homer

would hold his finger to the pane until his finger was bright red, wet and cold,
and then he’d touch Candy with the finger—which woke her up when she was
slow to respond to his gentler touching of her stubble. Homer and Candy
loved how they fit together in the bed again and how Angel could fit between
them when Candy was nursing him, and how Candy’s milk would sometimes
wake them both up before Angel’s crying would. They agreed: they had never
been happier. So what if the sky, when it was almost May, was still the slate
color of February, and still streaked with sleet? So what if the secret they kept
in St. Cloud’s could not be kept forever—and was already a secret that half of

Heart’s Haven and Heart’s Rock had the sense to figure out for themselves?
People from Maine don’t crowd you; they let you come to your senses in your
own, good time.

always conducted in the dispensary—Nurse Angela keeping the record, Dr.
Larch and Homer taking turns at poking Angel’s belly, looking into Angel’s
eyes and feeling Angel’s grip. “Admit it,” Nurse Edna said to Candy and
Homer at one such weighing-in ceremony. “You like it here.”

which the morning had begun, had turned to freezing rain. That day, in
Heart’s Rock, Olive Worthington had her own secret. Perhaps if Homer and
Candy had been more forthcoming to her, Olive would have shared her secret
with them; she would have grabbed the phone and called them. But people
from Maine don’t like the telephone, a rude invention; especially in the case
of important news, a telephone catches you too off-guard. A telegram
provides you with a decent, respectful interval in which to gather your senses
and respond. Olive sent them her secret in a telegram; that gave everyone a
little more time.

Candy would see the telegram first. She was nursing Angel in the girls’

division, to quite an appreciative audience of girl orphans, when Mrs. Grogan
brought her the telegram, which one of the lackeys who slaved for the
stationmaster had finally gotten around to delivering. The telegram was an
obvious shock to Candy, who quite abruptly handed Angel to Mrs. Grogan,
although Angel did not appear to be through nursing. It astonished Mrs.
Grogan that Candy did not even pause to properly replace her breast in her
bra—she just buttoned her blouse over herself and, in spite of the weather, ran
outdoors and across to the hospital entrance of the boys’ division.

of his (Homer’s) heart might prove instructive to Homer. Wilbur Larch was
thinking very carefully about his answer when Candy burst upon them.

of words, yet her enthusiasm for her subject had clearly carried her away; she
went far beyond her usual, shorthand self.

WALLY FOUND ALIVE/STOP/
RECOVERING ENCEPHALITIS CEYLON/STOP/
LIBERATED FROM RANGOON BURMA/STOP/
TEMPERATURE NINETY-TWO DEGREES/STOP/
WEIGHT ONE HUNDRED FIVE POUNDS/STOP/
PARALYZED/STOP/
LOVE OLIVE

“A hundred and five pounds,” said Homer Wells.

“Alive,” Candy whispered.
“Paralyzed,” Nurse Angela said.
“Encephalitis,” said Wilbur Larch.
“How could his temperature be ninety-two degrees, Wilbur?” Nurse Edna

asked.

those details—the clarification of which would take quite a long time. For
Captain Worthington, who had abandoned his plane over Burma—about ten
months ago—the clarification of many such details would take years.

parachute had to push against the rain to open. Yet the roar of the plane was
so near, Wally was afraid he’d pulled the cord too soon. He was afraid of the
bamboo—he’d heard stories of fliers being impaled by it—but he missed the
bamboo and landed in a teak tree, a branch of which separated his shoulder.
His head may have hit the trunk, or else the pain in his shoulder caused him to
lose consciousness. It was dark when he woke up, and since he couldn’t see
how far below the ground was, he didn’t dare to free himself from the chute
cords until morning. Then he gave himself too much morphine—for his
shoulder—and lost the syringe in the dark.

In his haste to abandon the plane, he’d not had time to locate a machete; in

the morning he spent quite a while cutting through the chute cords—using
only the bayonet in his ankle sheath, and having the use of only one strong
arm. He was lowering himself to the ground when his dog tags caught on a
vine, and because of his bad shoulder he could neither support all his weight
with one arm nor free the tags, and so he lost them; the chain cut his neck
when the tags came off, and he landed on an old teakwood log what was
hidden under the ferns and the dead palm fronds. The log rolled, and he
sprained his ankle. When he realized that in the monsoon weather he would
never know east from west, that was when he discovered that his compass
was gone. He rubbed some sulfa powder on his cut neck.

whatever was the least dense. In this way, after three days, he had the
impression that the jungle was either thinning out or that he was getting better
at picking his way through it. China was east of Wally, but Wally went south;
China was up—over the mountains—but Wally sought the valleys. Where
Wally was, the valleys ran southwesterly. He was right about one thing: the
jungle was thinning out. It was also getting warmer. Every night he climbed a
tree and slept in its crotch. The large, twisted trunks of the peepul tree—as
gnarled as giant, wooden cables—made the best crotches for sleeping, but
Wally wasn’t the first creature to figure this out. One night, at eye level, in the

crotch of a peepul tree next to him, a leopard was examining itself for ticks.
Wally followed the leopard’s example, and discovered several. He gave up
trying to remove the leeches.

rock, swallowing something the approximate size and shape of a beagle.
Wally guessed it was a monkey, although he couldn’t remember if he had seen
any monkeys. He had seen monkeys, of course, but he’d forgotten them; he
had a fever. He tried to take his temperature, but the thermometer in his first-
aid kit was broken.

the mosquitoes; the climate was changing. The river with the tiger in it had
produced a broader valley; the forest was changing, too. He caught a fish with
his hands and ate its liver raw; he cooked frogs as big as cats, but their legs
were fishier than the frog legs he remembered. Perhaps it was the lack of
garlic.

whatsoever; the fruit left a musty aftertaste, and for a whole day he vomited
and had chills. Then the river where he’d seen the tiger turned into a bigger
river; the monsoon water had a powerful current; Wally was encouraged to
build a raft. He remembered the rafts he had engineered for travel on
Drinkwater Lake, and he cried to think how much harder it was to build a raft
with bamboo and vines than with pitch pine and ropes—and stray boards and
nails. And how much heavier the green bamboo was, too. It didn’t matter that
the raft leaked; it barely floated; and if he needed to portage, he knew he
couldn’t carry it.

current slowed down, and he just drifted. He had no idea how many days he
drifted, or when he first knew for certain that he had a fever; about the time he
saw the rice paddies and the water buffaloes, he would say later. One day he
would remember waving to the women in the rice paddies; they looked so
surprised to see him.

way. He had gone into the heart of Burma, which is shaped like a kite with a
long tail; he was much nearer to Mandalay then he was to China, and the
Japanese held Mandalay. But Wally had a fever of one hundred four; he just
drifted; sometimes, he couldn’t tell the river from the rice paddies. It was
strange how both the men and women wore long skirts, but only the men
covered their hair; they wore what looked like baskets on their heads, and the
baskets were wrapped with strips of brightly colored silk. The women’s heads
were bare, but many of them put flowers in their hair. Both the men and the

women braided their hair. They seemed to be eating all the time, but they
were just chewing betel nuts. Their teeth were stained; their lips made them
appear as if they’d been drinking blood, but that was just the betel juice.

on bamboo stilts; the families ate outdoors on a porch. They gave him rice
and tea and lots of things with curry. When his fever went down, Wally ate
panthay khowse (noodles and chicken) and nga sak kin (curried fish balls).
Those were the first words that his Burmese rescuers tried to teach him, but
Wally misunderstood; he thought nga sak kin was the name of the man who
had carried him off the raft and held Wally’s head steady while the man’s wife
fed Wally with her fingers. She was wonderfully small and wore a sheer white
blouse; her husband touched the blouse and called it by name, trying to teach
Wally more of his language.

smelled like the inside of the thatched houses—she smelled like chintz and
lemon rind.

their names out loud and smiled. They smiled back at him, Mr. Curried Fish
Balls and his wife, Mrs. Blouse. She smelled as sticky-sweet as frangipani;
she smelled as citrous as bergamot.

fever broke and he stopped vomiting—when the headaches were over and the
shaking chills were gone, and he wasn’t even nauseous anymore—that was
when he noticed the paralysis. At that time, it was a stiff paralysis in both his
lower and upper extremities. (“Spasticity,” Wilbur Larch would have called
it.) Wally’s arms and legs stuck straight out and he couldn’t move them; he
was delirious for two or three weeks and when he tried to talk, his speech was
thick and slow. He had trouble eating because of the tremors in his lips and
tongue. He couldn’t empty his bladder, and the natives had to catheterize him
with a tiny, rough bamboo shoot—in order for him to urinate at all.

And they kept moving him. They always moved him over water. Once he

saw elephants; they were dragging logs out of the forests. The surface of the
water was forever interrupted with turtles and black snakes and water
hyacinths, and betel juice—a darker red than the blood that traced Wally’s
urine.

“Nga Sak Kin?” Wally asked. “Aingyis?” he asked. Where had they gone?

Although the faces of his rescuers kept changing, they seemed to understand
him. Must come from a big family, Wally thought. “I’m paralyzed, aren’t I?”
he asked the small, pretty men and women, who always smiled. One of the
women washed and combed his hair; her whole family watched Wally’s hair

drying in the sun—the blond light leaping into it as it dried: how that
impressed them!

it’s a present from her! he thought. Then they covered his blond hair with a
dark wig—it was a waxy pigtail, and they piled it high on top of his head and
studded it with flowers. The children giggled. They shaved his face so close
his skin burned; they shaved his legs—below the knee, where his legs
protruded from the long skirt they made him wear. The game was to make
him a woman. The game was to make him safe, to make him blend in.
Because his face was so pretty, it was easier for them to make him a woman
than a man; the ideal Burmese woman has no breasts.

they were so careful about everything else. The bamboo shoot wasn’t always
clean; the catheter’s roughness hurt him and made him bleed, but it was the
dirtiness that would give him the infection. The infection would make him
sterile. The epididymis, Wilbur Larch could have informed him, is a single
coiled tube in which the sperm mature after leaving the testicle. Epididymitis
(an infection of that little tube) prevents sperm from reaching the sperm duct.
In Wally’s case, the infection would permanently seal his tube.

He suffered urinary retention, his bladder was distended—they had no choice
but to relieve him. At times, Wally would wonder if there wasn’t an easier
way—or if the bamboo was clean—but what could he say to them?
“Aingyis,” he would say. “Nga Sak Kin?” he would ask them.

They were bombing the oil fields along the Irrawaddy. Wally knew where he
was. He used to bomb those fields, too. Before he heard the bombing (and, as
always, disguised as a woman), he was taken to a doctor in Mandalay. His
eyes were smarting because they’d rubbed a curry paste on his face to make
him look brown. But, up close, with those blue eyes and that patrician nose,
he couldn’t have fooled anyone. He saw many Japanese in Mandalay. The
doctor had trouble explaining to Wally what was wrong with him. He said the
following in English: “Japanese B mosquito.”

“I was bitten by a Japanese mosquito?” Wally said. But what’s a B

mosquito? he wondered. He no longer needed a catheter to pee, but the
infection had done its damage.

By the time he heard the bombing of the Irrawaddy, the paralysis had left his

upper extremities—he had the full use of his arms, again—and the spasticity
had left his legs; although his legs were still paralyzed, it was a flaccid
paralysis and not quite symmetrical (his left leg was more dead than his

right). His bladder was okay, and except for the effects of curry, his bowels
were okay, too; what he could detect of his sexual function felt normal.

explain to Candy and to Homer Wells.

“What’s that mean?” Candy asked.
“It means that Wally can have a normal sex life,” said Homer Wells, who

didn’t know about Wally’s epididymis. Wally would have a normal sex life,
but he wouldn’t have an adequate sperm count. He would still have orgasm
and ejaculation—since so much of the ejaculate is made in the prostate, which
is quite a way downstream. He just could never make his own baby.

about the encephalitis.

Wally caught it from the mosquitoes. It was called Japanese B encephalitis,

and it was quite common in Asia during the war. “It is an arthropod-borne
virus,” Wilbur Larch explained.

of the disease, but it was well enough known to be documented. There are
numerous changes that occur in the tissue of the brain, but the changes in the
spinal cord look very much like polio. The incubation period is about a week
long and the acute disease process lasts only a week or ten days; the recovery
is very slow, with muscular tremors lasting sometimes for months.

“Considering that it comes from birds, it’s a big disease,” Wilbur Larch said

to Nurse Edna and Nurse Angela. The mosquito picks up the virus from birds
and transmits it to men and other large animals.

disguised him as a woman. The Japanese were both attracted to and
intimidated by the Burmese women—especially the Padaung women with
their high brass collars wound in spirals to stretch their necks. That Wally was
a woman and an invalid made him an untouchable. That they had made him
look Eurasian also made him an outcast.

river at nights or they protected him from the sun with an umbrella—and with
more curry paste. He got very tired of curried fish balls, but he kept asking for
them—or so the Burmese thought; that was all they gave him. And when he
was delirious, he said Candy’s name. One of the boatmen asked him about it.

Wally lay under a roof of mats and watched the boatman sculling.

“Aingyis,” Wally said. He meant, like her—a good woman, a wife.
The boatman nodded. At the next port on the river—Wally didn’t know

where: it might have been Yandoon—they gave him another sheer white

blouse.

smiled; he just kept drifting. The sampan’s sharp nose seemed to smell the
way. It was a country of smells to Wally—it was a fragrant dream.

course. Elephants and oil fields, rice paddies and bombs falling, dressed up as
a woman and paralyzed from the waist down—Larch had been there; he had
been everywhere. He had no trouble imagining Rangoon and water buffaloes.
Every ether dream has its equivalent of British underground agents smuggling
American pilots across the Bay of Bengal. Wally’s trip through Burma was a
voyage Wilbur Larch had often undertaken. The black-currant door of
petunias was at war with the odor of dung, all the way.

pilot and a Sinhalese crew. Wilbur Larch had taken many such flights.

pilot’s seat. The pilot smelled of garlic and turmeric.

could still see the white, waxy flowers of the wild lime bushes; he could still
see the jungle.

smelled like tea.

“We’re going to Ceylon?” Wally asked.
“Can’t keep a blond in Burma, lad,” the Englishman said. “Don’t you know

Burma’s full of Nips?” But Wally preferred to remember his native friends.
They had taught him to salaam—a low bow with the right hand on the
forehead (always the right hand, they’d explained); it was a bow of salutation.
And when he was sick, someone had always stirred the punkah for him—a
punkah is a large, screen-shaped fan that is moved by a rope (pulled by a
servant).

“Punkah,” Wally said to the English pilot.
“What’s that, lad?” the pilot asked.
“It’s so hot,” said Wally, who felt drowsy; they were flying at a very low

altitude, and the little plane was an oven. A brief scent of sandalwood came
through the stronger garlic in the pilot’s sweat.

pilot got a kick out of saying “American” instead of “Fahrenheit,” but Wally
didn’t notice.

“Ninety-two degrees!” Wally said. It felt like the first fact he could hang his

hat on, as they say in Maine.

“What happened to the legs?” the Englishman asked casually.

grave; he thought that Wally meant a plane—that the Japanese B mosquito
was the name of the fighter plane that shot Wally’s plane down.

them all, but you can’t trust the Nips.”

The Sinhalese crew had slathered themselves with coconut oil and were

wearing sarongs and long, collarless shirts. Two of them were eat-ing
something and one of them was screeching into the radio; the pilot said
something sharply to the radioman, who instantly lowered his voice.

cats fucking.”

ever been to Ceylon. When Wally didn’t answer him—Wally seemed to be
daydreaming—the Englishman said, “We not only planted the first rubber
trees and developed their bloody rubber plantations—we taught them how to
brew tea. They knew how to grow it, all right, but you couldn’t get a decent
cup of tea on the whole bloody island. And now they want to be
independent,” the Englishman said.

“Ninety-two degrees,” Wally said, smiling.
“Yes, just try to relax, lad,” the pilot said. When Wally burped, he tasted

cinnamon; when he shut his eyes, he saw African marigolds come out like
stars.

say something, then the three of them would speak in unison.

“Bloody Buddhists, all of them,” the pilot explained. “They even pray on the

bloody radio. That’s Ceylon,” the Englishman said. “Two thirds tea and one
third rubber and prayer.” He yelled something at the Sinhalese, who lowered
their voices.

was worried about an aircraft in his vicinity. “Pray now, damn you,” he said to
the Sinhalese, who were all asleep. “That Japanese B mosquito,” the
Englishman said to Wally. “What does it look like?” he asked. “Or did it get
you from behind?”

But all Wally would say was, “Ninety-two degrees.”
After the war, Ceylon would become an independent nation; twenty-four

years after that, the country would change its name to Sri Lanka. But all
Wally would remember was how hot it had been. In a way, his parachute had
never touched down; in a way, he had remained over Burma for ten months—
just floating there. All Wally would remember of his own story would never
make as much sense as an either frolic. And how he would survive the war—

sterile, paralyzed, both legs flaccid—had already been dreamed by Big Dot
Taft.

It was thirty-four degrees in St. Cloud’s when Homer Wells went to the
railroad station and dictated a telegram to Olive to the stationmaster. Homer
could not have phoned her, and lied to her that directly. And hadn’t Olive
telegramed them? She must have had her reasons for not wanting to talk on
the phone. It was with the almost certain feeling that Ray and Olive knew
everything that Homer and Candy were doing that Homer dictated his
telegram to Olive—respecting a polite formality as faint as a suspicion. It was
a suspicion that could be proven only impolitely, and Homer Wells was polite.

GOD BLESS YOU AND WALLY/STOP
WHEN WILL WE SEE HIM/STOP
CANDY AND I HOME SOON/STOP
I HAVE ADOPTED A BABY BOY/STOP
LOVE HOMER

“You’re kind of young to adopt somebody, ain’t you?” the stationmaster

asked.

“Right,” said Homer Wells.
Candy telephoned her father.
“It’s gonna be weeks, or maybe months before they can move him,” Ray

told her. “He’s gotta gain some weight before he can travel so far, and there’s
probably tests they’ve gotta do—and there’s still a war on, don’t forget.”

At her end of the phone, Candy just cried and cried.
“Tell me how you are, darlin’,” Ray Kendall said. That was when she could

have told him that she’d just had Homer’s baby, but what she said was,
“Homer’s adopted one of the orphans.”

After a pause, Raymond Kendall said, “Just one of them?”
“He’s adopted a baby boy,” Candy said. “Of course, I’ll help, too. We’ve

kind of adopted a baby together.”

“You have?” Ray said.
“His name is Angel,” Candy said.
“Bless his heart,” Ray said. “Bless you both, too.”
Candy cried some more.
“Adopted, huh?” Ray asked his daughter.
“Yes,” said Candy Kendall. “One of the orphans.”
She quit the breast-feeding, and Nurse Edna introduced her to the device for

pumping her breasts. Angel disliked his conversion to formula milk, and for a
few days he displayed a cranky temperament. Candy displayed a cranky
temperament, too. When Homer observed that her pubic hair would be very

nearly grown back by the time she returned to Heart’s Haven, she snapped at
him.

except you?” Candy asked.

Homer showed signs of strain, too.
He was impatient with Dr. Larch’s suggestion that Homer’s future lay in the

medical profession. Larch insisted on giving Homer a brand-new copy of
Gray’s Anatomy; he also gave him the standard Greenhill’s Office Gynecology
and the British masterpiece Diseases of Women.

apple farmer.”

need a little more of the gynecological—and the pediatric, of course.”

“Maybe I’ll end up a lobsterman,” Homer said.
“And I’ll send you a subscription to The New England Journal of

Medicine,” Dr. Larch said. “And JAMA, and S, G and O . . .”

“You’re the doctor,” said Homer Wells tiredly.
“How do you feel?” Candy asked Homer.
“Like an orphan,” Homer said. They held each other tightly, but they did not

make love. “How do you feel?” Homer asked.

“I won’t know until I see him,” Candy said honestly.
“What will you know then?” Homer asked.
“If I love him, or you, or both of you,” she said. “Or else I won’t know any

more than I know now.”

“It’s always wait and see, isn’t it?” Homer asked.
“You don’t expect me to tell him anything when he’s still over there, do

you?” Candy asked.

“No, of course I don’t expect that,” he said softly. She held him tighter; she

began to cry again.

“Oh, Homer,” she said. “How can he weigh only a hundred and five

pounds?”

“I’m sure he’ll gain some weight,” Homer said, but his entire body shivered

suddenly; Wally’s body had been so strong. Homer remembered the first time
Wally had taken him to the ocean; the surf had been unusually rough, and
Wally had warned him about the undertow. Wally had taken him by the hand
and shown him how to duck under the waves, and how to ride them. They had
walked along the beach for an hour, undistracted by Candy; she had been
tanning.

“I don’t understand all this stupid lying down in the sun,” Wally had told

Homer, who agreed. “You’re either doing something in the sun and you pick

up a little color, or you’re doing something else—but you’re doing something.
That’s the main thing.”

They were picking up shells and stones—the beachcombers’ search for

specimens. Homer was immediately impressed with the smoothness of the
stones and the broken pieces of shell—how the water and the sand had
softened them.

“This is a very experienced piece,” Wally had said, handing Homer an

especially worn bit of shell; it had no edges.

“Experienced,” Homer had said.
And after that, Wally had said, “And this is a worldly stone,” exhibiting an

old, smooth one.

natural process of the grinding smooth of stones and shells. If he and Wally
went back to the beach, would they still be beachcombers, or was it inevitable
that the love of a woman would alter even their most commonplace
experiences together? Was he my friend for five minutes? wondered Homer
Wells—and my rival for the rest of my life?

Homer entrusted Nurse Edna with the care of the hillside orchard. He

explained that the wire-mesh sleeves around the trees could not be wrapped
so tightly that they didn’t permit the trees to grow—but also not so loosely
that the mice could girdle the trees. He showed her how to spot the tunnels of
the pine mice who ate the roots.

Everyone kissed Candy good-bye, even Wilbur Larch—who, when he

reached to shake Homer’s hand, appeared embarrassed that Homer brushed
past his hand and hugged him, and kissed him on his leathery neck. Nurse
Edna sobbed the most freely. As soon as the pickup truck rolled past the girls’
division, Wilbur Larch closed himself in the dispensary.

It was a Sunday, so Raymond Kendall was at work on his homemade

torpedo when Homer brought Candy home. Candy told Homer that she could
not face seeing Olive until the next morning, but she was gripped by an
unforeseen panic when Homer drove off with Angel. Although her milk was
gone, she knew she would still wake up to her baby’s clock—even though it
would be Homer, alone, who was hearing the actual cries. And how many
nights had it been since she had slept alone?

She would tell Homer the next day: “We’ve got to find a way to share him. I

mean, even before we tell Olive—not to mention, Wally—we have to both
take care of him, we have to both be with him. I just miss him too much.”

“I miss you,” Homer Wells told her.
He was an orphan who’d had a family for less than a month of his life, and

he was not prepared to not have a family again.

were his mother; she threw her arms around him, and kissed him, and wept.
“Show me that baby—oh, he’s darling!” she cried. “Whatever possessed you?
You’re so young, and you’re all alone.”

me with him.”

“Of course,” Olive said. “I’ll help you, too.” She carried Angel to Wally’s

room, where Homer was surprised to see a crib—and more baby things, for
just one baby, than could have been collected in a thorough search of both the
boys’ and girls’ divisions in St. Cloud’s.

had even bought a special pot for sterilizing the nipples. In the linen closet,
there were more diapers than there were pillowcases and sheets and towels.
For the first time in his life, Homer felt that he’d been adopted. To his horror,
he saw that Olive loved him.

obviously been busy, planning. “Wally won’t be able to climb stairs, so I’m
having the dining room made into a bedroom—we can always eat in the
kitchen, and the dining room has that terrace for when the weather’s nice. I’m
having a ramp built from the terrace to the patio around the pool, for the
wheelchair.”

nightfall, that ever-old, ever-new remorse that Mr. Rochester had told Jane
Eyre to dread, that “poison of life.”

In the second week of May, Ira Titcomb and Homer worked alongside each
other, putting the bees out in the orchards. It was the start of blossom time, the
night before Mother’s Day, when they put out the hives. Everyone
remembered Mother’s Day that year; no one forgot Olive. The house was full
of little presents and lots of apple blossoms, and some of the work crew even
gave Homer a Mother’s Day present—they thought it was so funny that he’d
adopted a baby.

“Just imagine you with your very own baby!” was the way Big Dot Taft put

it.

In the apple mart, where they were giving the display tables a fresh coat of

paint, there were two babies on display—Angel Wells and Florence and
Meany Hyde’s boy, Pete. Pete Hyde looked like a potato compared to Angel
Wells—which is to say that his disposition was entirely bland and he had no
apparent bones in his face.

“Well, Homer, your Angel is an Angel,” Florence Hyde would say, “and my

Pete’s a Pete.”

The apple-mart women teased him endlessly; Homer just smiled. Debra

Pettigrew was especially interested in handling Angel Wells; she would look
intently into the baby’s face for the longest time before announcing that she
was sure the baby was going to look just like Homer. “Only more
aristocratic,” she guessed. Squeeze Louise said the baby was “too precious for
words.” When Homer was out in the field, either Olive or one of the apple-
mart women looked after Angel, but most of the time Candy looked after her
baby.

that Olive said Candy was as much of a mother to that child as Homer was,
and Olive therefore—as a kind of joke—gave Candy a Mother’s Day present,
too. All the while, the bees did their work, carrying pollen from the Frying
Pan to Cock Hill, and the honey leaked between the clapboards that housed
the hives.

One morning, on a corner of the newspaper, Homer Wells saw Olive’s

handwriting—a penciled remark above the day’s headlines, any one of which
might have prompted Olive to respond. But somehow Homer thought the
remark was written to him.

INTOLERABLE DISHONESTY

Olive had written.

And one night Candy overheard Ray. Her bedroom light was out; in the

pitch dark she heard her father say, “It’s not wrong, but it’s not right.” At first
she thought he was on the telephone. After she drifted back to sleep, the
sound of her door opening and closing woke her up again, and she realized
Ray had been sitting in her room with her—addressing her in her sleep, in the
darkness.

And some of the nights in blossom time, Candy would say to Homer,

“You’re an overworked father.”

“Isn’t he?” Olive would say admiringly.
“I’m going to take this kid off your hands for the night,” Candy would say,

and Homer would smile through the tension of these exchanges. He would
wake up alone in Wally’s room in anticipation of Angel needing his bottle. He
could imagine Raymond Kendall getting up to heat the formula and Candy
being in her bed with the bottle of formula in as near an approximation of the
correct angle of her breast as she could arrange it.

Ray’s torpedo parts were stolen from Kittery Navy Yard; both Homer and

Candy knew that’s how he got them, but only Candy criticized Ray for it.

“I’ve caught more mistakes in the way they do things than they know things

to do,” Ray said. “Not likely they could catch me.”

being a bomb here—especially when there’s a baby in the house.”

baby.”

something far away.”

“When it’s ready, I’ll fire it,” Ray said.
“What are you going to fire it at?” Homer asked Raymond Kendall.
“I don’t know,” Ray said. “Maybe the Haven Club—the next time they tell

me I spoil their view.”

father when they were alone.

“It’s like this,” Ray said slowly. “I’ll tell you what it’s like—a torpedo. It’s

like Wally, comin’ home. You know he’s comin’, you can’t calculate the
damage.”

Candy asked Homer for an interpretation of Ray’s meaning.
“He’s not telling you anything,” Homer said. “He’s fishing—he wants you

to tell him.”

had made love in the cider house—which had not yet been cleaned for use in
the harvest.

“The way it is,” said Homer Wells.
“Yes,” she said. “Just suppose that we wait, and we wait. How long could

we wait?” she asked. “I mean, after a while, suppose it gets easier to wait than
to tell?”

“We’ll have to tell, sometime,” said Homer Wells.
“When?” Candy asked.
“When Wally comes home,” Homer said.
“When he comes home paralyzed and weighing less than I weigh,” Candy

said. “Is that when we spring it on him?” she asked.

he remembered, has a certain heft; one does not need to press on it—it seems
to cut on its own—but one does need to take charge of it in a certain way.
When one takes it up, one has to move it. A scalpel does not require the
authority of force, but it demands of the user the authority of motion.

“We have to know where we’re going,” said Homer Wells.
“But what if we don’t know?” Candy asked. “What if we know only how we

want to stay? What if we wait and wait?”

“Do you mean that you won’t ever know if you love him or me?” Homer

asked her.

Homer put his hand on her—where her pubic hair had grown back, almost
exactly as it was.

“You don’t think I’ll need you, too?” he asked her. She rolled to her other

hip, turning her back to him—but at the same time taking his hand from
where he’d touched her and clamping his hand to her breast.

“We’ll have to wait and see,” she said.
“Past a certain point, I won’t wait,” said Homer Wells.
“What point is that?” Candy asked. Because his hand was on her breast, he

could feel her holding her breath.

parents are,” Homer said. “That’s the point. I won’t have Angel thinking he’s
adopted. I won’t have him not knowing who his mother and father are.”

“I’m not worried about Angel,” Candy said. “Angel will get lots of love. I’m

worried about you and me.”

“And Wally,” Homer said.
“We’ll go crazy,” Candy said.
“We won’t go crazy,” Homer said. “We’ve got to take care of Angel and

make him feel loved.”

“But what if I don’t feel loved, or you don’t—what then?” Candy asked him.
“We’ll wait until then,” said Homer Wells. “We’ll just wait and see,” he

said, almost with a vengeance. A spring breeze blew over them, bearing with
it the sickly-sweet stench of rotten apples. The smell had an almost-ammonia
power that so overwhelmed Homer Wells that he released Candy’s breast and
covered his mouth and nose with his hand.

got an actual letter—her first communication from him since he’d been shot
down a year ago.

wanted to move him from there until he’d gained fifteen pounds, until his
muscle tremors had ceased and his speech had lost the daydreaming
vacantness of malnutrition. He wrote the letter from another hospital, in New
Delhi; after a month in India, he had gained an additional ten pounds. He said
that he’d learned to put cinnamon in his tea, and that the slap of sandals was
nearly constant in the hospital.

trip home when he weighed one hundred forty pounds and when he had
mastered a few basic exercises that were essential to his rehabilitation. He
couldn’t describe the route of his proposed voyage home because of the

censors. Wally hoped that the censors would understand—in the light of his
paralysis—that it was necessary for him to say something about his “perfectly
normal” sexual function. The censors had allowed this to pass. Wally still
didn’t know he was sterile; he knew he’d had a urinary tract infection, and
that the infection was gone.

“And how is Homer? How I miss him!” Wally wrote.
But that was not the part of the letter that devastated Candy. Candy was so

devastated by the beginning of the letter that the rest of the letter was simply a
continuing devastation to her.

“I’m so afraid that you won’t want to marry a cripple,” Wally began.
In her single bed, tugged into sleep and into wakefulness by the tide, Candy

stared at the picture of her mother on the night table. She would have liked a
mother to talk to at the moment, and perhaps because she had no memory of
her mother she remembered the first night she had arrived at the orphanage.
Dr. Larch had been reading to the boys from Great Expectations. Candy
would never forget the line that she and Homer had walked in on.

wretchedness,’ ” Wilbur Larch had read aloud. Either Dr. Larch had
predetermined that he would end the evening’s reading with that line, or else
he had only then noticed Candy and Homer Wells in the open doorway—the
harsh hall light, a naked bulb, formed a kind of institutional halo above their
heads—and had lost his place in the book, causing him, spur-of-the-moment,
to stop reading. For whatever reason, that perception of wretchedness had
been Candy’s introduction to St. Cloud’s, and the beginning and the end of
her bedtime story.

Fifteen Years

For fifteen years they were a couple: Lorna and Melony. They were set in
their ways. Once the young rebels of the women-only boardinghouse, they
now occupied the choicest rooms—with the river view—and they served as
superintendents to the building for a consideration regarding their rent.
Melony was handy. She had learned plumbing and electricity at the shipyard
where she was one of a staff of three electricians. (The other two were men,
but they never messed with Melony; no one ever would.)

Lorna became more domestic. She lacked the concentration for advanced

training at the shipyard, but she remained an employee—“Stay on for the
pension plan,” Melony had advised her. Lorna actually liked the assembly-
line monotony, and she was smart about signing up for the overtime pay shifts
—she was willing to work at odd hours if she could work less. Her being out
late bothered Melony.

Lorna became increasingly feminine. She not only wore dresses (even to

work) and used more makeup and perfume (and watched her weight); her
voice, which had once been harsh, actually softened and she developed a
smile (especially when she was being criticized). Melony found her
increasingly passive.

As a couple, they rarely fought because Lorna would not fight back. In

fifteen years, she had discovered that Melony relented if there wasn’t a
struggle; given any resistance, Melony would never quit.

“You don’t fight fair,” Melony would occasionally complain.
“You’re much bigger than I am,” Lorna would say coyly.
An understatement. By 195_, when Melony was forty-something (no one

knew exactly how old she was), she weighed one hundred seventy-five
pounds. She was five feet eight inches tall; she was almost fifty inches around
at her chest, which meant that she wore men’s shirts (large; anything smaller
than a seventeen-inch neck wouldn’t fit her; because her arms were short, she

always had to roll up the sleeves). She had a thirty-six-inch waist, but only a
twenty-eight-inch inseam (which meant that she had to roll up the cuffs of her
trousers or have Lorna shorten them). Melony’s pants were always so tight
across her thighs that they quickly lost their crease there, but they were very
baggy in the seat—Melony was not fat-assed, and she had the nondescript
hips of most men. She had small feet, which always hurt her.

charge was assault, but in the end she was stuck with nothing more damaging
than a disturbance of the peace. She’d been in the ladies’ room of a pizza bar
in Bath when some college boy had tried to engage Lorna in conversation.
When he saw Melony take her place beside Lorna at the bar, he whispered to
Lorna, “I don’t think I could find anyone for your friend.” He was imagining
a possible double-date situation.

“Speak up!” Melony said. “Whispering is impolite.”
“I said, I don’t think I could find a date for you,” the boy said boldly.
Melony put her arm around Lorna and cupped her breast.
“I couldn’t find a sheep dog that would hold still for you,” Melony told the

college boy.

enough—and strictly to impress the shipyard workers at the far end of the bar;
he couldn’t have known that the men were Melony’s coworkers. They held
the college boy while Melony broke his nose with a metal napkin container.

The way that Melony liked to fall asleep was with her big face on Lorna’s

tight bare belly; Lorna could always tell when Melony had fallen asleep
because of the change in Melony’s breathing, which Lorna could feel against
her pubic hair. In fifteen years, there was only one night when Lorna had to
ask her friend to move her heavy head before she had soundly fallen asleep.

“What is it? You got cramps?” Melony asked.
“No, I’m pregnant,” Lorna said. Melony thought it was a joke until Lorna

went into the bathroom to be sick.

this, calmly. We’ve been like a married couple for fifteen years, and now
you’re pregnant.” Lorna curled herself into a ball around one of the pillows;
she covered her head with the other pillow. Her face and her stomach and her
private parts were protected, but still she trembled; she began to cry. “I guess
what you’re telling me,” Melony went on, “is that when women are fucking
each other, it takes a lot longer for one of them to get pregnant than when a
woman is fucking some guy. Right?” Lorna didn’t answer her; she just went
on sniveling. “Like about fifteen years—like that long. It takes fifteen years
for women to get pregnant when they’re just fucking other women. Boy,

that’s some effort,” Melony said.

summer, the trees were so leafy that the river was hard to see. She let a
summer breeze dry the sweat on her neck and chest before she started
packing.

“Please don’t go—don’t leave me,” Lorna said; she was still all balled up on

the bed.

“I’m packing up your things,” Melony said. “I’m not the one who’s

pregnant. I don’t have to go nowhere.”

out.”

orphanage,” Melony told her friend.

“It was just a guy—just one guy, and it was just once!” Lorna cried.
“No, it wasn’t,” Melony said. “A guy gets you pregnant fast. With women, it

takes fifteen years.”

When she had packed up Lorna’s things, Melony stood over the bed and

shook her friend, who tried to hide under the bedcovers. “Fifteen years!”
Melony cried. She shook Lorna, and shook her, but that was all she did to her.
She even walked Lorna to the train. Lorna looked very disheveled, and it was
only the early morning of what would be a wilting summer day.

Melony handed Lorna a large carton.

Melony said. “Don’t say nothing to her, just give it to her. And if she’s dead,
or not there anymore,” Melony started to say; then she stopped. “Forget that,”
she said. “She’s either there or she’s dead, and if she’s dead, bring the carton
back. You can give it back to me when you pick up the rest of your stuff.”

“The rest of my stuff?” Lorna said.
“I was faithful to you. I was loyal as a dog,” Melony said, more loudly than

she’d meant to speak, because a conductor looked at her strangely—as if she
were a dog. “You see somethin’ you want, shitface?” Melony asked the
conductor.

“The train is about to leave,” he mumbled.
“Please don’t throw me out,” Lorna whispered to Melony.
“I hope you have a real monster inside you,” Melony told her friend. “I hope

it tears you to pieces when they drag it out your door.”

Lorna fell down in the aisle of the train, as if she’d been punched, and

That was when the conductor noticed that he was shaking almost as violently
as Lorna.

Melony thought about Lorna arriving in St. Cloud’s—that turd of a

stationmaster (would he still be there?), that long walk uphill with her suitcase
and the large carton for Mrs. Grogan (could Lorna make it?), and would the
old man still be in the business? She’d not been angry for fifteen years, but
now here was another betrayal and Melony pondered how readily her anger
had returned; it made all her senses keener. She felt the itch to pick apples
again.

Wells. She remembered how she’d first loved having Lorna as a pal—in part,
because she could complain to Lorna about what Homer had done to her.
Now Melony imagined she’d like to complain about Lorna to Homer Wells.

his pants, she couldn’t keep her eyes off it.”

just shove it into time. When time passes, it’s the people who knew you
whom you want to see; they’re the ones you can talk to. When enough time
passes, what’s it matter what they did to you?

next minute, when she thought of Homer Wells, she thought she’d like to kill
him.

When Lorna came back from St. Cloud’s and went to the boardinghouse to

retrieve her things, she found that everything had been neatly packed and
boxed and gathered in one corner of the room; Melony was at work, so Lorna
took her things and left.

or at the pizza bar in Bath where everyone from the yard went; on these
occasions, they were polite but silent. Only once did Melony speak to her.

“The old woman, Grogan—she was alive?” Melony asked.
“I didn’t bring the box back, did I?” Lorna asked.
“So you gave it to her?” Melony asked. “And you didn’t say nothing?”
“I just asked if she was alive, and one of the nurses said she was, so I gave

the carton to one of the nurses—as I was leavin’,” Lorna said.

“And the doctor?” Melony asked. “Old Larch—is he alive?”
“Barely,” Lorna said.
“I’ll be damned,” said Melony. “Did it hurt?”
“Not much,” Lorna said cautiously.
“Too bad,” Melony said. “It shoulda hurt a lot.”
In her boardinghouse, where she was now the sole superintendent, she took

from a very old electrician’s catalogue a yellowed article and photograph
from the local newspaper. She went to the antiques shop that was run by her
old, dim-witted devotee, Mary Agnes Cork, whose adoptive parents had
treated her well; they’d even put her in charge of the family store. Melony
asked Mary Agnes for a suitable frame for the newspaper article and the
photograph, and Mary Agnes was delighted to come up with something
perfect. It was a genuine Victorian frame taken from a ship that had been
overhauled in the Bath yards. Mary Agnes sold Melony the frame for much
less than it was worth, even though Melony was rich. Electricians are well
paid, and Melony had been working full-time for the shipyard for fifteen
years; because she was the superintendent of the boardinghouse, she lived
almost rent-free. She didn’t own a car and she bought all her clothes at Sam’s
Army-Navy Men’s Store.

Wally Worthington in the air over Burma for one whole night—because the
newspaper article was about Captain Worthington, and the picture—which
Melony had recognized, fifteen years ago—was also of Wally. The article was
all about the miraculous rescue of the downed (and paralyzed) pilot, who had
been awarded the Purple Heart. As far as Melony was concerned, the whole
story resembled the plot of a cheap and unlikely adventure movie, but she
liked the picture—and the part of the article that said Wally was a local hero,
a Worthington from those Worthingtons who for years had owned and
managed the Ocean View Orchards in Heart’s Rock.

frame containing the article and photograph over her bed. In the darkness she
liked knowing it was there—over her head, like history. She liked that as
much as looking at the photograph in the daylight hours. And in the darkness,
she would linger over the syllables of that hero’s name.

times; she was more familiar with saying this. “Heart’s Rock,” she would say,
quickly spitting the short words out.

would whisper, “Fifteen years.” And just before she would fall asleep, she
would ask of the first, flat light that crept into her bedroom, “Are you still
there, Sunshine?” What is hardest to accept about the passage of time is that
the people who once mattered the most to us are wrapped up in parentheses.

For fifteen years, Homer Wells had taken responsibility for the writing and
the posting of the cider house rules. Every year, it was the last thing he
attached to the wall after the fresh coat of paint had dried. Some years he tried

being jolly with the rules; other years he tried sounding nonchalant; perhaps it
had been Olive’s tone and not the rules themselves that had caused some
offense, and thereby made it a matter of pride with the migrants that the rules
should never be obeyed.

cleaned out. A word of warning about the drinking and the falling asleep in
the cold-storage room was mandatory. And long after the Ferris wheel at Cape
Kenneth was torn down and there were so many lights on the coast that the
view from the cider house roof resembled a glimpse of some distant city, the
migrants still sat on the roof and drank too much and fell off, and Homer
Wells would ask (or tell) them not to. Rules, he guessed, never asked; rules
told.

rules in a confiding voice. “There have been some accidents on the roof, over
the years—especially at night, and especially in combination with having a
great deal to drink while sitting on the roof. We recommend that you do your
drinking with both feet on the ground,” Homer would write.

and used for other things—a kind of desperation grocery list, for example,
always by someone who couldn’t spell.

CORN MEEL

REGULAR FLOWER

was written across Homer’s rules one year.

At times, the solitary sheet of paper gathered little insults and mockeries of a

semi-literate nature.

“No fucking on the roof!” or “Beat-off only in cold storage!”
Wally told Homer that only Mr. Rose knew how to write; that the pranks,

and insults, and shopping lists were all composed by Mr. Rose, but Homer
could never be sure.

Every summer Mr. Rose would write to Wally and Wally would tell Mr.

Rose how many pickers he needed—and Mr. Rose would say how many he
was bringing and the day they would arrive (give or take). No contract ever
existed—just the short, reliable assurances from Mr. Rose.

Some summers he came with a woman—large and soft and quiet, with a

baby girl riding her hip. By the time the little girl could run around and get
into trouble (she was about the age of Angel Wells), Mr. Rose stopped
bringing her or the woman.

For fifteen years the only migrant who was as constant as Mr. Rose was

Black Pan, the cook.

the woman and the daughter didn’t show up again.

“She growin’, like your boy,” Mr. Rose would say.
“And how’s your lady?” Homer would ask.
“She lookin’ after the little girl,” Mr. Rose would say.
Only once in fifteen years did Homer Wells approach Mr. Rose on the

subject of the cider house rules. “I hope they don’t offend anyone,” Homer
began. “I’m responsible—I write them, every year—and if anyone takes
offense, I hope you’ll tell me.”

“No offense,” said Mr. Rose, smiling.
“They’re just little rules,” Homer said.
“Yes,” said Mr. Rose. “They are.”
“But it does concern me that no one seems to pay attention to them,” Homer

finally said.

Mr. Rose, whose bland face was unchanged by the years and whose body

had remained thin and lithe, looked at Homer mildly. “We got our own rules,
too, Homer,” he said.

“Your own rules,” said Homer Wells.
“ ’Bout lots of things,” said Mr. Rose. “ ’Bout how much we can have to do

with you, for one thing.”

“With me?” Homer said.
“With white people,” said Mr. Rose. “We got our rules about that.”
“I see,” Homer said, but he didn’t really see.
“And about fightin’,” said Mr. Rose.
“Fighting,” said Homer Wells.
“With each other,” said Mr. Rose. “One rule is, we can’t cut each other bad.

Not bad enough for no hospital, not bad enough for no police. We can cut
each other, but not bad.”

“I see,” Homer said.
“No, you don’t,” said Mr. Rose. “You don’t see—that’s the point. We can cut

each other only so bad that you never see—you never know we was cut. You
see?”

“Right,” said Homer Wells.
“When you gonna say something’ else?” Mr. Rose asked, smiling.
“Just be careful on the roof,” Homer advised him.
“Nothin’ too bad can happen up there,” Mr. Rose told him. “Worse things

can happen on the ground.”

Homer’s mouth; Mr. Rose’s hand had been so fast, Homer had never seen it—
he never knew before that someone could actually catch hold of someone’s
tongue.

“Caught ya,” said Mr. Rose, smiling; he let Homer’s tongue go.
Homer managed to say, “You’re very fast.”
“Right,” said Mr. Rose alertly. “Ain’t no one faster.”
Wally complained to Homer about the yearly wear and tear on the cider

house roof. Every two or three years, they had to re-tin the roof, or fix the
flashing, or put up new gutters.

Wally asked Homer.

“I don’t know,” Homer said. “Write him a letter and ask him.”
But no one wanted to offend Mr. Rose; he was a reliable crew boss. He

made the picking and the pressing go smoothly every harvest.

they absorbed in repairs to the cider house roof were more than compensated
for by Mr. Rose’s reliability.

exactly complaining. “I mean, I don’t really want to know how he gets all
those pickers to behave themselves.”

“But they do behave themselves,” Homer said.
“He does a good job,” Candy said. “Let him have his own rules.”
Homer Wells looked away; he knew that rules, for Candy, were all private

contracts.

Fifteen years ago, they had made their own rules—or, really, Candy had

made them (before Wally came home). They stood in the cider house (after
Angel was born, on a night when Olive was looking after Angel). They had
just made love, but not happily; something was wrong. It would be wrong for
fifteen years, but that night Candy had said, “Let’s agree to something.”

“Okay,” Homer said.
“Whatever happens, we share Angel.”
“Of course,” Homer said.
“I mean, you get to be his father—you get all the father time you want to

have—and I get to have all the mother time I need,” Candy said.

“Always,” said Homer Wells, but something was wrong.
“I mean, regardless of what happens—whether I’m with you, or with

Wally,” Candy said.

Homer was quiet for a while. “So you’re leaning toward Wally?” he asked.
“I’m not leaning anywhere,” Candy said. “I’m standing right here, and

we’re agreeing to certain rules.”

“I didn’t know they were rules,” said Homer Wells.
“We share Angel,” Candy said. “We both get to live with him. We get to be

his family. Nobody ever moves out.”

“Even if you’re with Wally?” Homer said, after a while.
“Remember what you told me when you wanted me to have Angel?” Candy

asked him.

Homer Wells was cautious, now. “Remind me,” he said.
“You said that he was your baby, too—that he was ours. That I couldn’t

decide, all by myself, not to have him—that was the point,” Candy said.

“Yes,” Homer said. “I remember.”
“Well, if he was ours then, he’s ours now—whatever happens,” Candy

repeated.

“In the same house?” asked Homer Wells. “Even if you go with Wally?”
“Like a family,” Candy said.
“Like a family,” said Homer Wells. It was a word that took a strong grip of

him. An orphan is a child, forever; an orphan detests change; an orphan hates
to move; an orphan loves routine.

house rules as there were people who had passed through the cider house.
Even so, every year, he posted a fresh list.

For fifteen years, the board of trustees had tried and failed to replace Dr.
Larch; they couldn’t find anyone who wanted the job. There were people
dying to throw themselves into unrewarded service of their fellow man, but
there were more exotic places than St. Cloud’s where their services were
needed—and where they could also suffer. The board of trustees couldn’t
manage to entice a new nurse into service there, either; they couldn’t hire
even an administrative assistant.

When Dr. Gingrich retired—not from the board; he would never retire from

the board—he mused about accepting the position in St. Cloud’s, but Mrs.
Goodhall pointed out to him that he wasn’t an obstetrician. His psychiatric
practice had never flourished in Maine, yet Dr. Gingrich was surprised and a
little hurt to learn that Mrs. Goodhall enjoyed pointing this out to him. Mrs.
Goodhall had reached retirement age herself, but nothing could have been
farther from that woman’s zealous mind. Wilbur Larch was ninety-something,
and Mrs. Goodhall was obsessed with retiring him before he died; she
realized that to have Larch die, while still in service, would register as a kind
of defeat for her.

Not long ago—perhaps in an effort to invigorate the board—Dr. Gingrich

had proposed they hold a meeting in an off-season hotel in Ogunquit, simply

to break the routine of meeting in their usual offices in Portland. “Make it a
kind of outing,” he proposed. “The ocean air and all.”

windows and doors and crunched underfoot; the drapes and the towels and the
bedsheets were gritty. The wind was off the ocean; no one could sit on the
veranda because the wind blew the rain under the roof. The hotel provided
them with a long, dark, empty dining room; they held their meeting under a
chandelier that no one could turn on—no one could find the right switch.

conduct their business in a former ballroom that had seen better days, in a
hotel so deeply in the off-season that anyone seeing them there would have
suspected they’d been quarantined. In fact, when he got a glimpse of them,
that is what Homer Wells thought; he and Candy were the hotel’s only other
off-season guests. They had taken a room for half the day; they were a long
way from Ocean View, but they’d come this far to be sure that no one would
recognize them.

with her back against Homer’s chest, his arms wrapped around her; they both
faced out to sea. He appeared to like the way the wind whipped her hair back
in his face, and neither of them seemed to mind the rain.

frowning at the weather and at the young couple braving the elements. In her
opinion, nothing could ever be normal enough. That was what was wrong
with Larch; not everyone who is ninety-something is senile, she would grant
you, but Larch wasn’t normal. And even if they were a young married couple,
public displays of affection were not acceptable to Mrs. Goodhall—and they
were calling all the more attention to themselves by their defiance of the rain.

and had no map with which he could have followed her thoughts, “I’ll bet
they’re not married.”

psychiatrist; perhaps it was the weather—they’d been planning to sail.

“I’ve figured out what he is,” Mrs. Goodhall told Dr. Gingrich, who thought

she was referring to the young man, Homer Wells. “He’s a nonpracticing
homosexual,” Mrs. Goodhall announced. She meant Dr. Larch, who was on
her mind night and day.

guess, but he looked at the young man with renewed interest. True, he was not
actually fondling the young woman; he seemed a trifle distant.

observed. “Of course we’d still have to find someone willing to replace him.”

Dr. Gingrich was lost. He realized that Mrs. Goodhall couldn’t be interested

in replacing the young man on the veranda, and that therefore she was still
thinking about Dr. Larch. But if Dr. Larch were a “nonpracticing
homosexual,” what could they ever catch him at?

Dr. Gingrich asked cautiously; it was not hard to rile Mrs. Goodhall.

“He’s obviously queer,” she snapped.
Dr. Gingrich, in all his years of psychiatric service to Maine, had never been

moved to apply the label of “nonpracticing homosexual” to anyone, although
he had often heard of such a thing; usually, someone was complaining about
someone else’s peculiarity. In Mrs. Goodhall’s case, she despised men who
lived alone. It wasn’t normal. And she despised young couples who displayed
their affection, or weren’t married, or both; too much of what was normal also
enraged her. Although he shared with Mrs. Goodhall the desire to replace Dr.
Larch and his staff at St. Cloud’s, it occurred to Dr. Gingrich that he should
have had Mrs. Goodhall as a patient—she might have kept him out of
retirement for a few more years.

When the young couple came inside the hotel, Mrs. Goodhall gave them

such a look that the young woman turned away.

“Did you see her turn away in shame?” Mrs. Goodhall would ask Dr.

Gingrich, later.

But the young man stared her down. He looked right through her! Dr.

Gingrich marveled. It was one of the best looks, in the tradition of
“withering,” that Dr. Gingrich had ever seen and he found himself smiling at
the young couple.

Ocean View.

“I don’t think they were married,” said Homer Wells. “Or if they’re married,

they hate each other.”

“Maybe that’s why I thought they were married,” Candy said.
“He looked a little stupid, and she looked completely crazy,” Homer said.
“I know they were married,” Candy said.
In the sad, dingy dining room in Ogunquit, while the rain pelted down, Mrs.

Goodhall said, “It’s just not normal. Doctor Larch, those old nurses—the
whole bit. If someone new, in some capacity, isn’t hired soon, I say we send a
janitor up there—just anyone who can look the place over and tell us how bad
it is.”

the young couple leave the hotel, and they had filled him with melancholy.

above her small gray head.

Cloud’s. Remarkably, she appeared to have found out about the place all by
herself. Nurse Caroline, they called her; she was constantly of use, and a great
help when Melony’s present for Mrs. Grogan arrived.

to lift; Nurse Edna and Nurse Angela had brought it over to the girls’ division
together. It was a sweltering summer afternoon; still, because it had been a
perfectly windless day, Nurse Edna had sprayed the apple trees.

Dr. Larch came to the girls’ division to see what was in the package.
“Well, go on, open it,” he said to Mrs. Grogan. “I haven’t got all day.”
Mrs. Grogan was not sure how to attack the carton, which was sealed with

wire and twine and tape—as if a savage had attempted to contain a wild
animal. Nurse Caroline was called for her help.

package for Mrs. Grogan, Nurse Caroline had been the only large gift that
anyone sent to St. Cloud’s; Homer Wells had sent her from the hospital in
Cape Kenneth. Homer Wells knew that Nurse Caroline believed in the Lord’s
work, and he had persuaded her to go where her devotion would be welcome.
But Nurse Caroline had trouble opening Melony’s present.

“Who left it?” Mrs. Grogan asked.
“Someone named Lorna,” Nurse Angela said. “I never saw her before.”
“I never saw her before, either,” said Wilbur Larch.
When the package was opened, there was still a mystery. Inside was a huge

coat, much too large for Mrs. Grogan. An Army surplus coat, made for the
Alaskan service, it had a hood and a fur collar and was so heavy that when
Mrs. Grogan tried it on, it almost dragged her to the floor—she lost her
balance a little and wobbled around like a top losing its spin. The coat had all
sorts of secret pockets, which were probably for weapons or mess kits—“Or
the severed arms and legs of enemies,” said Dr. Larch.

Mrs. Grogan, lost in the coat and perspiring, said, “I don’t get it.” Then she

felt the money in one of the pockets. She took out several loose bills and
counted them, which was when she remembered that it was the exact amount
of money that Melony had stolen from her when Melony had left St. Cloud’s
—and taken Mrs. Grogan’s coat with her—more than fifteen years ago.

“Oh, my God!” Mrs. Grogan cried, fainting.
Nurse Caroline ran to the train station, but Lorna’s train had already left.

When Mrs. Grogan was revived, she cried and cried.

spoke; Larch and Nurse Angela and Nurse Edna remembered Melony as
anything but “dear.” Larch tried on the coat, which was also too big and
heavy for him; he staggered around in it for a while, frightening one of the
smaller girls in the girls’ division who’d come into the lobby to investigate
Mrs. Grogan’s cries.

copper wire and a pair of rubber-handled, insulated wirecutters.

“I’ll bet she robbed some electrician.”

“A big electrician,” Nurse Angela said.
“You two,” Nurse Edna scolded them. “It’s a warm coat, anyway—at least it

will keep her warm.”

“It’ll give her a heart attack, lugging it around,” Dr. Larch said.
“I can wear it,” Nurse Caroline commented. It was the first time that Larch

and his old nurses realized that Nurse Caroline was not only young and
energetic, she was also big and strong—and, in a much less crude and vulgar
way, a little reminiscent of Melony (if Melony had been a Marxist, thought
Wilbur Larch—and an angel).

Larch had trouble with the word “angel” since Homer Wells and Candy had

taken their son away from St. Cloud’s. Larch had trouble with the whole idea
of how Homer was living. For fifteen years, Wilbur Larch had been amazed
that the three of them—Homer and Candy and Wally—had managed it; he
wasn’t at all sure what they had managed, or at what cost. He knew, of course,
that Angel was a wanted child, and well loved, and well looked after—or else
Larch couldn’t have remained silent. It was difficult for him to remain silent
about the rest of it. How had they arranged it?

with my fictional histories, me with my fictional heart defects—me with my
Fuzzy Stone.

need to remind himself that he had slept with someone else’s mother and
dressed himself in the light of her daughter’s cigar? That he had allowed to
die a woman who had put a pony’s penis in her mouth for money?

of 195_, the trees were thriving; the apples were mostly pale green and pink,
the leaves were a vibrant dark green. The trees were almost too tall for Nurse
Edna to spray with the Indian pump. I should ask Nurse Caroline to take over
the tending of them, Dr. Larch thought. He wrote a note to himself and left it
in the typewriter. The heat made him drowsy. He went to the dispensary and
stretched himself out on the bed. In the summer, with the windows open, he

could risk a slightly heavier dose, he thought.

The last summer that Mr. Rose was in charge of the picking crew at Ocean
View was the summer of 195_, when Angel Wells was fifteen. All that
summer, Angel had been looking forward to the next summer—when he
would be sixteen, old enough to have his driver’s license. By that time, he
imagined, he would have saved enough money—from his summer jobs in the
orchards and from his contribution to the harvests—to buy his first car.

His father, Homer Wells, didn’t own a car. When Homer went shopping in

town or when he volunteered at the hospital in Cape Kenneth, he used one of
the farm vehicles. The old Cadillac, which had been equipped with a hand-
operated brake and accelerator so Wally could drive it, was often available,
and Candy had her own car—a lemon-yellow Jeep, in which she had taught
Angel to drive and which was as reliable in the orchards as it was sturdy on
the public roads.

“I taught your father how to swim,” Candy always told Angel. “I guess I can

teach you how to drive.”

Of course Angel knew how to drive all the farm vehicles, too. He knew how

to mow, and how to spray, and how to operate the forklift. The driver’s
license was simply necessary, official approval of something Angel already
did very well on the farm.

And, for a fifteen-year-old, he looked much older. He could have driven all

over Maine and no one would have questioned him. He would be taller than
his boyish, round-faced father (they were dead even as the summer began),
and there was a defined angularity in the bones of his face that made him
seem already grown up; even the trace of a beard was there. The shadows
under his eyes were not unhealthy-looking; they served only to accent the
vivid darkness of his eyes. It was a joke between father and son: that the
shadows under Angel’s eyes were “inherited.” “You get your insomnia from
me,” Homer Wells would tell his son, who still thought he was adopted.
“You’ve got no reason to feel adopted,” his father had told him. “You’ve got
three parents, really. The best that most people get is two.”

Candy had been like a mother to him, and Wally was a second father—or

the favorite, eccentric uncle. The only life Angel had known was a life with
all of them. At fifteen, he’d never suffered so much as a change of rooms;
everything had been the same since he could remember it.

He had what had been Wally’s room, the one Wally had shared with Homer.

Angel had been born into a real boy’s room: he’d grown up surrounded by
Wally’s tennis and swimming trophies, and the pictures of Candy with Wally
(when Wally’s legs worked), and even the picture of Candy teaching Homer

how to swim. Wally’s Purple Heart (which Wally had given to Angel) was
hung on the wall over the boy’s bed; it concealed an oddly smeared
fingerprint—Olive’s fingerprint, from the night when she’d crushed a
mosquito against that wall, which was the same night Angel Wells had been
conceived in the cider house. After fifteen years, the wall needed a fresh coat
of paint.

Homer’s room down the hall had been the master bedroom; it had been

Olive’s room and the room where Senior had died. Olive herself had died in
Cape Kenneth Hospital before the war was over, even before they’d sent
Wally home. It was an inoperable cancer, which spread very quickly after
they’d done the exploratory.

always with Angel but Olive was never alone. Homer and Candy had said—
privately, only to each other—that things might have worked out differently if
Wally had made it back to the States before Olive died. Because of Wally’s
precariousness and the added difficulty of moving him in wartime, it was
thought best not to tell Wally of Olive’s cancer; that was how Olive had
wanted it, too.

pain-killers that she mistook Homer for Wally in their last few meetings.
Homer had been in the habit of reading to her—from Jane Eyre, from David
Copperfield, and from Great Expectations—but he gave that up when Olive’s
attention began to wander. The first few times Olive confused Homer with
Wally, Homer couldn’t be sure whom she thought she was addressing.

Homer’s hand, which she did not really hold so much as contain in her lap.

“Forgive him?” said Homer Wells.
“Yes,” Olive said. “He can’t help how much he loves her, or how much he

needs her.”

lose me. If he loses you, too, who’s going to look after him?”

“I’ll always look after him,” Candy said. “Homer and I will look after him.”
But Olive was not so drugged that she failed to detect and dislike the

ambiguity of Candy’s answer. “It’s not right to hurt or deceive someone who’s
already been hurt and deceived, Candy,” she said. With the drugs she was
taking, Olive felt a perfect freedom. It was not for her to tell them that she
knew what she knew; it was for them to tell her what they were keeping from
her. Until they told her, she could keep them guessing about what she knew.

To Homer, Olive said: “He’s an orphan.”
“Who is?” Homer asked.

everything. He’s come from having nothing—when he sees what he can have,
he’ll take everything he sees. My son,” Olive said, “don’t blame anyone.
Blame will kill you.”

hear how she was breathing, she kissed him as if he were Wally.

“Blame will kill you,” he repeated to Candy, after Olive had died. “ ‘Dread

remorse,’ ” said Homer Wells, forever recalling Mr. Rochester’s advice.

he doesn’t even know his mother’s dead. Not to mention,” Candy said; then
she stopped talking.

“Not to mention,” said Homer Wells.

Candy and Wally were married less than a month after Wally returned to
Ocean View; Wally weighed one hundred forty-seven pounds, and Homer
Wells pushed the wheelchair down the church aisle. Candy and Wally
occupied the converted bedroom on the ground floor of the big house.

Homer Wells had written to Wilbur Larch, shortly after Wally had come

home. Olive’s death (Homer wrote to Larch) had “fixed” things for Candy
and Wally more securely than Wally’s paralysis, or than whatever sense of
betrayal and guilt might have plagued Candy.

“Candy’s right: don’t worry about Angel,” Wilbur Larch had written to

Homer Wells. “Angel will get enough love. Why would he feel like an orphan
if he never is one? If you’re a good father to him, and Candy’s a good mother
to him—and if he’s got Wally loving him, too—do you think he’s going to
start missing some idea of who his so-called real father is? The problem is not
going to be Angel’s problem. It’s going to be yours. You’re going to want him
to know you’re his real father, because of you—not because he’s going to
need to know. The problem is, you’re going to need to tell. You and Candy.
You’re going to be proud. It will be for you, and not for Angel, that you’re
going to want to tell him he’s no orphan.”

And to himself, or as an entry in A Brief History of St. Cloud’s, Wilbur Larch

wrote: “Here in St. Cloud’s we have just one problem. His name is Homer
Wells. He’s a problem, wherever he goes.”

Aside from the darkness in his eyes and an ability to sustain a pensive,

faraway look that was both alert and dreaming, Angel Wells resembled his
father very little. He never thought of himself as an orphan; he knew he had
been adopted, and he knew he came from where his father came from. And he
knew he was loved; he had always felt it. What did it matter that he called
Candy “Candy” and Homer “Dad”—and Wally “Wally”?

carry Wally—up some steps, or into the surf, or out of the shallow end of the
pool and back into the wheelchair. Homer had taught Angel how to carry
Wally into the surf, when they went to the beach. Wally was a better swimmer
than any of them, but he needed to get into deep enough water so that he
could either float over a wave or duck under one.

“You just can’t let him get dragged around in the shallow water,” Homer had

explained to his son.

observed). As good a swimmer as he was, Wally was never allowed to swim
alone, and for many summers now, Angel Wells had been Wally’s lifeguard
whenever Wally swam his laps or just floated in the pool. Almost half the
physical contact between Wally and Angel occurred in the water, where they
resembled otters or seals. They wrestled and dunked each other so ferociously
that Candy couldn’t help being anxious at times for both of them.

hand-operated controls, someone else had to collapse the wheelchair and put
it in or take it out of the back of the car. The first collapsible wheelchairs were
quite heavy. Although Wally would occasionally drag himself through the
ground floor of the house using one of those metal walkers, his legs were
mere props; in unfamiliar terrain, he needed his wheelchair—and in rough
terrain, he needed a pusher.

been the passenger in the Cadillac. Although Homer and Candy might have
complained if they had known, Wally had long ago taught Angel to drive the
Cadillac.

have to be long enough to reach the pedals.” That was not what Candy had
told Angel about teaching him to drive in the Jeep. “Just as soon as your legs
are long enough to reach the pedals,” she had told him, kissing him (which
she did whenever she had the excuse), “I’ll teach you how to drive.”

easy to teach because he’d been driving the Cadillac for years.

(which Wally did a lot, especially in the water). “But some rules are just rules.
You just got to break them carefully.”

“It’s dumb that I have to be sixteen before I get a driver’s license,” Angel

told his father.

grow up on farms.”

to Wally, who maintained his good strokes even sitting down. The club
members had complained a little about the wheelchair tracks on the clay—but
what would the Haven Club have been without tolerating one or another
Worthington eccentricity? Wally would set the wheelchair in a fixed position
and hit only forehands for fifteen or twenty minutes; Angel’s responsibility
was to get the ball exactly to him. Then Wally would move the chair and hit
only backhands.

Angel. “At least, I’m not getting any better.” Angel got a lot better; he was so
much better than Candy that it sometimes hurt his mother’s feelings when she
detected how boring it was for Angel to play with her.

resisted even the indoor football at St. Cloud’s—although he occasionally
dreamed of stickball, usually with Nurse Angela pitching; she was always the
hardest to hit. And Homer Wells had no hobbies—nothing beyond following
Angel around, as if Homer were his son’s pet, a dog waiting to be played
with. Pillow fights in the dark; they’d been popular for a few years. Kissing
each other good night, and then finding excuses to repeat the ritual—and
finding novel ways to wake each other in the mornings. If Homer was bored,
he was also busy. He had continued his volunteer work for Cape Kenneth
Hospital; in a sense, he had never stopped his war effort, his service as a
nurses’ aide. And he was a veteran reader of medical literature. The Journal of
the American Medical Association and The New England Journal of Medicine
were very acceptably piled up on the tables and in the bookcases of the Ocean
View house. Candy objected to the illustrations in The American Journal of
Obstetrics and Gynecology.

“I need a little intellectual stimulation around here,” Homer Wells would say

whenever Candy complained about the graphic nature of this material.

“I just don’t think that Angel has to see it,” Candy said.
“He knows I have a little background in the subject,” Homer said.
“I don’t object to what he knows, I object to the pictures,” Candy said.
“There’s no reason to mystify the subject for the child,” Wally said, taking

Homer’s side.

“There’s no need to make the subject grotesque, either,” Candy argued.
“I don’t think it’s either a mystery or grotesque,” Angel said, that summer he

was fifteen. “It’s just interesting.”

“You’re not even going out with girls, yet,” Candy said, laughing, and

vaginal operations. The illustration indicated the lines of incision for the
removal of the vulva and a primary tumor in an extended radical vulvectomy.

His life was so spare, he’d tacked only two things on his walls—and one of
those was in his bathroom. By his bed he had a picture of Wally in his flier’s
scarf and sheepskin. Wally was posing with the crew of Opportunity Knocks;
the shadow from the wing of the dark plane completely obscured the face of
the radioman, and the glare of the Indian sun completely whited out the face
of the crew chief (who had eventually died of his colon complication); only
Wally and the co-pilot were correctly illuminated, although Homer had seen
better pictures of them both. The co-pilot sent Wally a picture of himself and
his growing family every Christmas; he had five or six children and a plump
wife; but every year the co-pilot looked thinner (the amoeba he’d contacted in
Burma had never entirely left him).

copy—the one he’d never sent to the board of trustees of St. Cloud’s. The
exposure to the steam from the shower had given to the paper of the
questionnaire the texture of a parchment lampshade, but each question had
remained readable and idiotic.

The master bed was higher than most (because, in his day, Senior

Worthington had enjoyed looking out the window while lying down); it was a
feature Homer also appreciated about the bed. He could oversee the pool from
up there, and he could see the cider house roof; he liked to lie on that bed for
hours, just looking out the window. “Homer!” Candy called to him. “Please
come see what your son is reading!”

that’s how Wally spoke, too, and Angel always said “Dad” or “Pop” when he
addressed his father. It had been an uninterrupted, fifteen-year relationship—
Homer and Angel upstairs, Wally and Candy in the former dining room
downstairs. The four of them ate their meals together.

view of the lit dining room and kitchen windows of strangers’ houses—
Homer Wells liked to take a short car ride before dinner. He wondered about
the families who were eating dinner together—what were their real lives like?
St. Cloud’s had been more predictable. What did anyone really know about all
those families sitting down to have a meal?

whenever Homer appeared to her to be taking longer and longer drives before
dinner.

“Angel has a family, a really wonderful family. Yes, that’s the main thing,”

Homer agreed.

luckiest man alive—how anyone would give up his legs to be as happy as
Wally was—those were the nights that Candy couldn’t sleep; those were the
nights when she’d be aware of Homer Wells, who was wide awake, too. Some
nights they would meet in the kitchen—they’d have some milk and apple pie.
Some nights, when it was warm, they’d sit by the swimming pool not
touching each other; to any observer, the space between them would have
indicated a quarrel (although they rarely quarreled), or else indifference (but
they were never indifferent to each other). The way they sat by the pool
reminded them both of how they used to sit on Ray Kendall’s dock, before
they’d sat closer together. If ever they were too conscious of this memory—
and of missing that dock, or of missing Ray (who’d died before Angel was
old enough to have any memory of him)—this would spoil their evening by
the swimming pool and they would be forced back to their separate bedrooms,
where they would lie awake a little longer.

would often watch Homer and Candy sitting by the pool, which he could also
see out the window of his room. If Angel ever thought anything about the two
of them sitting out there, it was why such old friends sat so far apart.

Raymond Kendall had died shortly after Wally and Candy were married. He

was killed when the lobster pound blew up; his whole dock was blown apart,
and his lobster boat sank, and two old heaps of automobiles he was working
on were jolted across his parking lot a good twenty-five yards down the
coastal highway by the explosion—as if they’d been driven under their own
power. Even the picture window at the Haven Club was collapsed by the
blast, but it happened so late at night that the bar was closed and none of the
Haven Club’s regular drinkers was on hand to see their favorite eyesore
obliterated from their view of Heart’s Haven Harbor.

mechanical genius, he must have found out something about a torpedo that he
didn’t know. The misfortune of someone you love can bring out the guilt in
you; Candy regretted that she’d not told her father about Homer and Angel
Wells. It was no consolation to her that she imagined Ray already knew
everything; she had been able to understand, by his silences, that he wanted to
hear it from her. Yet not even the death of her father could prompt Candy
Kendall to tell her story to anyone.

funny to say) to ask old Mr. Powell if he was inventing a new ice cream
flavor.

flicked Angel his first rubber. Angel’s feelings were slightly hurt that Herb
had not initiated him sooner. Angel’s pal and co-worker, pudgy Pete Hyde,
was only a few months older than Angel (and not nearly so grown up, in
countless ways), and Angel knew that Herb Fowler had bounced a rubber off
Pete Hyde’s head when Pete was only thirteen. What Angel hadn’t yet
fathomed was that Pete Hyde was a part of Ocean View’s working-class
family, and Angel—although he worked with the workers—was from the
boss’s family.

in charge. This would not have surprised Olive, and it was clear that Candy
and Wally were grateful for Homer’s authority. Perhaps because the workers
knew that Homer had come from St. Cloud’s, they felt that he was closer to
them; he lived in what Big Dot Taft called “the fancy house,” but he was like
one of them. None of the workers resented that Homer was the boss, with the
possible exception of Vernon Lynch, who resented any and every authority—
all the more so since Grace Lynch had died.

Candy, who looked into the matters concerning the workers’ wives,

discovered that Grace had been pregnant; she’d died of acute peritonitis,
following a misguided attempt to abort herself. Homer, who would often
wonder why she had not chosen to make a second trip to St. Cloud’s, liked to
think that she had not died in vain. It had been her death (and Dr. Harlow’s
particularly unsympathetic response to it) that had prompted Nurse Caroline
to resign from the Cape Kenneth Hospital staff, as Homer Wells had been
encouraging her to do. Nurse Caroline finally took Homer’s suggestion and
offered her services to St. Cloud’s.

Wilbur Larch. The old man had not grown too careless.

“Sent you for what?” Larch asked.
“I’m a trained nurse,” she said. “I’m here to help you.”
“Help me do what?” asked Larch, who was not very convincing at

portraying innocence.

“I believe in the Lord’s work,” Nurse Caroline said, exasperated.
“Well, why didn’t you say so?” Wilbur Larch asked.
So he’s given me something besides apple trees, the old man mused. So

there’s still hope for him.

of trustees at bay a while longer.

confided to the board. “I would say that she takes a lot of pressure off making
any immediate decision.” (As if they weren’t trying to replace the old man
every minute!)

young doctor and a young administrator. You know how I feel about the
records; the records of that place are pure whimsy. But it’s at least a
temporary improvement; I’ll buy that,” she said.

time, lady, and you’ll buy more than that.”

hold so still under the ether cone that the mask would stay in place after his
hand had dropped to his side; only the force of his exhalations would make
the cone fall. He had lost a lot of weight. In a mirror, or traveling with his
beloved ether, he had the impression that he was becoming a bird. Only Nurse
Caroline had the courage to criticize his drug habit. “You should know, of all
people,” Nurse Caroline told him roughly.

“Me of all people?” Larch asked innocently. Sometimes, he found it was fun

to provoke her.

“You have a low opinion of religion,” Nurse Caroline remarked to him.
“I suppose so,” he said cautiously. She was a little too young and quick for

him, he knew.

“Well, what do you suppose a drug dependency is—if not a kind of

religion?” Nurse Caroline asked.

personal—prayer is anyone’s choice. Pray to whom or what you want! It’s
when you start making rules,” said Wilbur Larch, but he felt lost. He knew
she could talk circles around him. He admired socialism, but talking to a
damn socialist was like talking to any true believer. He had heard her say, so
many times, that a society that approved of making abortion illegal was a
society that approved of violence against women; that making abortion illegal
was simply a sanctimonious, self-righteous form of violence against women
—it was just a way of legalizing violence against women, Nurse Caroline
would say. He had heard her say, so many times, that abortions were not only
a personal freedom of choice but also a responsibility of the state—to provide
them.

always trap him. He was not a systems man, he was just a good one.

make Larch furious.

“No, not in a better world!” he cried. “In this one—in this world. I take this

world as a given. Talk to me about this world!” But it all made him so tired. It
made him want a little ether. The more he tried to keep up with Nurse
Caroline, the more he needed ether; and the stronger he felt his need for it, the
more that made her right.

“Oh, I can’t always be right,” Larch said tiredly.
“Yes, I know,” Nurse Caroline said sympathetically. “It’s because even a

good man can’t always be right that we need a society, that we need certain
rules—call them priorities, if you prefer,” she said.

have time for philosophy, or for government, or for religion. I don’t have
enough time,” said Wilbur Larch.

even when the orphanage was as silent as the few, remaining, abandoned
buildings of St. Cloud’s—even when it was ghostly quiet—Wilbur Larch
heard babies crying. And they were not crying to be born, he knew; they were
crying because they were born.

That summer, Mr. Rose wrote that he “and the daughter” might be arriving a
day or so ahead of the picking crew; he hoped the cider house would be ready.

“It’s been a while since we’ve seen the daughter,” Wally remarked, in the

apple-mart office. Everett Taft was outside oiling Wally’s wheelchair for him,
so Wally sat on the desk—his withered legs swinging limply, his unused feet
in a perfectly polished pair of loafers; the loafers were more than fifteen years
old.

Candy was playing with the adding machine. “I think the daughter is about

Angel’s age,” she said.

“Right,” said Homer Wells, and Wally hit Homer with a very well-thrown

jab—the only sort of punch he could really throw, sitting down. Because
Homer had been leaning on the desk and Wally had been sitting up straight,
the punch caught Homer completely by surprise, and very solidly, in the
cheek. The punch surprised Candy so much that she pushed the adding
machine off the far corner of the desk. The machine crashed to the office
floor; when Homer hit the floor, he did not land quite as loudly or as
deadweight as the adding machine, but he landed hard. He put his hand to his
cheek, where he would soon have some swelling and the start of a slight
shiner.

“Wally!” Candy said.
“I’m so sick of it!” Wally shouted. “It’s time you learned a new word,

Homer,” Wally said.

“Jesus, Wally,” Candy said.
“I’m okay,” Homer said, but he remained sitting on the office floor.
“I’m sorry,” Wally said. “It just gets on my nerves—you saying ‘Right’ all

the time.” And although he had not made this particular mistake for years, he
lifted himself off the desk with his arms—it must have seemed to him that the
appropriate thing to do would be to swing his legs to the floor and help
Homer up to his feet; he’d forgotten that he couldn’t walk. If Candy had not
caught him under the arms, and hugged him—chest to chest—Wally would
have fallen. Homer got to his feet and helped Candy put Wally back on the
desk.

“I’m sorry, buddy,” Wally said. He put his head on Homer’s shoulder.
Homer did not say “Right.” Candy went to get a piece of ice in a towel for

Homer’s face, and Homer said, “It’s okay, Wally. Everything’s okay.” Wally
slumped a little forward, and Homer leaned over him; their foreheads
touched. They maintained that position until Candy returned with the ice.

everything, that he accepted everything, but that he resented not being told. At
the same time, Homer and Candy imagined that it was a relief to Wally—that
he didn’t have to admit that he knew everything. What new, uncomfortable
position would they put him in by telling him now? Wasn’t the main thing
that Angel not know?—not until Candy and Homer told him; the main thing
was that Angel shouldn’t hear it from anyone else. Whatever Wally knew, he
would never tell Angel.

If Homer was surprised, he was surprised that Wally had never hit him

before.

night by the swimming pool. Some kind of large, whirring insect was caught
in the leaf skimmer; they heard its wings beating against the soggy leaves.
Whatever it was, it grew weaker and weaker.

“I guess it is irritating how I say ‘Right’ all the time,” Homer said.
“Wally knows,” Candy said.
“That’s what you’ve thought for fifteen years,” said Homer Wells.
“You think he doesn’t know?” Candy asked.
“I think he loves you, and you love him,” Homer said. “I think he knows we

love Angel. I think Wally loves Angel, too.”

“But do you think he knows Angel is ours?” Candy asked.
“I don’t know,” Homer said. “I know that one day Angel has to know he’s

ours. I think that Wally knows I love you,” he said.

“And that I love you?” Candy asked. “Does he know that?”
“You love me sometimes,” Homer said. “Not very often.”
“I wasn’t talking about sex,” Candy whispered.
“I was,” said Homer Wells.
They had been careful, and—in their opinion—almost good. Since Wally

had come home from the war, Homer and Candy had made love only two
hundred seventy times—an average of only eighteen times a year, only one
and a half times a month; they were simply as extremely careful as they knew
how. It was another thing that Candy had insisted Homer agree to: that for
Wally’s sake and for Angel’s—for the sake of what Candy called their family
—they would never be caught; they would never cause anyone even the
slightest embarrassment. If anyone ever saw them, they would stop, forever.

That was why they hadn’t told Wally. Why wouldn’t Wally accept that

they’d thought he was dead—not just missing—and that they had needed each
other, and that they’d wanted Angel, too? They knew Wally would have
accepted that. Who couldn’t accept what had happened? What was happening
now was what they knew Wally wanted to know, and they couldn’t tell him.

Candy’s becoming pregnant would seem too miraculous to be believed.
Because Wally’s sterility was not the result of encephalitis, it would take him
several years to discover that he was sterile. He would remember the unclean
instrumentation of his urethra, but he would remember it gradually—the way
he remembered the rest of Burma. Once he learned that his epididymis was
sealed, for life, the specificity of the various bamboo shoots came back to
him; sometimes it seemed to him that he could recall, exactly, every catheter
that had ever relieved him.

There is no difference in the feeling of orgasm; Wally was fond of

emphasizing this particular point to Homer Wells. Wally called it “shooting”;
Homer was the only person with whom Wally could joke about his condition.
“I can still aim the gun, and the gun still goes off,” Wally said, “and it still
goes off with a bang—for me,” he said. “It’s just that no one ever finds the
bullet.”

sampan would instrument him—for which he was always so grateful—there
was never very much bleeding, even when the bamboo shoot was not exactly
straight; his blood seemed pale and minimal by comparison to the bloodier
stains of the betel juice that everyone spat on the deck.

another trip to St. Cloud’s; she would not fool him, she said. And so this
added consideration—that Candy never get pregnant—contributed to the
moderation of their coupling, which was almost always managed under
conditions harsh enough to win the approval of New England’s founding
fathers. It still would not have won Wilbur Larch’s approval.

(As if everyone wasn’t already suspicious, regardless of how they behaved!)
There was no one place that they met, no one day, no one time of day. In the
winter months, when Angel—after school—would take Wally for a swim in
the indoor pool of a private boys’ academy, Homer and Candy could manage
an occasional late afternoon together. But Homer’s bed, which had been
Olive’s bed, which also suffered from all the master-bedroom connotations,
was full of conflicting emotions for them both—and the bed Candy shared
with Wally had its own set of taboos. Rarely, they took trips. The cider house
was fit to be used only in the late summer, after it had been made ready for
the picking crew; but ever since Angel had learned to drive, he’d been given
the run of the orchards—he was allowed to drive any of the farm vehicles,
just so he kept off the public roads, and his pudgy pal, Pete Hyde, often drove
around with him. Homer suspected that Pete and Angel used the cider house
to drink beer in secret, whenever they could convince Herb Fowler to buy
beer for them; or that they went there for the fifteen-year-old thrill of smoking
cigarettes. And at night, trapped by their own insomnia, where could Candy
and Homer have disappeared to—now that Angel was an insomniac, too?

reason for Candy ever to get pregnant (certainly not, knowing what Homer
knew)—and no reason for them ever to get caught, either. But by being so
reasonable and so discreet, Homer regretted the loss of the passion with which
he and Candy had at first collided. Although she insisted (and he agreed), he
thought it was quite unnecessary for him to write to Dr. Larch to request
(which he did) the proper equipment with which to treat the emergency that
Candy feared.

For fifteen years Homer had told her: “You won’t get pregnant. You can’t.”
“Do you have everything you need, if you need it?” she always asked him.
“Yes,” he said.
He’d gotten better about not saying “Right,” since Wally had hit him. And

when the word would slip out, it was often attended by an equally involuntary
wince—as if in anticipation of another punch, as if anyone he might say the
word to would feel as strongly about it as Wally and might be as fast as Mr.
Rose.

Wilbur Larch had misunderstood about the instruments Homer had

requested. For fifteen years, he’d misunderstood. Larch had sent everything
promptly. There were both a medium and a large vaginal speculum, and an
Auvard’s weighted speculum; there was a set of dilators with Douglass points
—and one uterine sound, one uterine biopsy curette, two vulsellum forceps, a
set of Sim’s uterine curettes, and a Rheinstater’s uterine flushing curette.
Larch sent enough Dakin’s solution and red Merthiolate (and enough sterile
vulval pads) for Homer Wells to perform abortions into the next century.

remained encouraged by the simple fact of Homer’s possessing the necessary
equipment.

put the bundle in a waterproof bag that had once contained Angel’s diapers.
He stored the instruments, along with the Merthiolate, the Dakin’s solution
and all the vulval pads, in the very back of the upstairs linen closet. Homer
kept the ether in the shed with the lawn and garden tools. Ether was
flammable; he didn’t want it in the house.

jolted him to realize that in their union there was (even after fifteen years) a
frenzy with which they clung to each other that would not have appeared pale
in comparison to their first such meeting in the cider house. But since Melony
had first introduced Homer Wells to sex—and it had been only during that
brief period of what seemed to him to be his “married life” with Candy in St.
Cloud’s that he had experienced anything of what sex ideally is—it was
Homer’s opinion that sex had little to do with love; that love was much more
focused and felt in moments of tenderness and of concern. It had been years
(for example) since he had seen Candy asleep, or had been the one to waken
her; years since he had watched her fall asleep, and had stayed awake to
watch her.

This tenderness he reserved for Angel. When Angel had been smaller,

Homer had occasionally encountered Candy in the darkness of Angel’s room,
and they had even shared a few evenings of that silent wondering parents
engage in while watching their children sleep. But Homer had fallen asleep,
many nights, in the empty twin bed beside Angel’s bed, just listening to the
breathing of his son; after all, Homer had spent his childhood trying to sleep
in a room where an entire population lay breathing.

child in the morning? Full of love and apology, both, Homer Wells concluded.
It was with Angel that he felt love like that; if Candy had such moments,
Homer imagined, she had to have them with Wally. An orphan’s pleasures are
compartmental. In St. Cloud’s, it was best to be hungry in the morning; they

didn’t run out of pancakes. There was sex, which called for good weather
(and, of course, Melony); there were acts of wandering and destruction
(Melony again, in any weather); there were solitary acts and moments of
reflection, which could occur only when it rained (and only without Melony).
As much as he desired a family, Homer Wells was not trained to appreciate a
family’s flexible nature.

That July—it was one hot and lazy Saturday afternoon—Homer was

floating in the pool; he had been in the orchards all morning, mulching the
young trees. Angel had been working with him, and now Angel was out of the
pool, but still dripping wet; he was tossing a baseball back and forth with
Wally. Wally sat on the lawn, on a slight knoll above the pool, and Angel
stood on the deck. They would throw the hardball back and forth, not talking
but concentrating on their throws; Wally would fire the ball with considerable
sting for someone in a sitting position but Angel had more zip on the ball. The
ball popped pleasantly in their big gloves.

her work clothes—jeans; a khaki field shirt, with oversized pockets and
epaulettes; work boots; a Boston Red Sox baseball cap with the visor turned
backward. (She cared more about protecting her hair from the sun than her
face, because in the summer her blondness could turn whiter, which she knew
showed more of the gray.)

“I know the men are out of the fields at noon on Saturday,” she said, her

hands on her hips, “but the women are working in the mart until three.”

deep in the pool, looking at Candy. Wally looked over his shoulder at her,
then fired the ball to Angel, who fired it back.

“Please hold the ball, while I’m trying to say something,” Candy said.
Wally held the ball. “What are you trying to say?” he asked.
“I think that on Saturdays, as long as there are people working at the mart,

you should refrain from playing at the pool—everyone can hear you, and I
think it kind of rubs it in.”

“Rubs what in?” Angel asked.
“That you get to play and live in the fancy house, as they call it, and they get

to work,” Candy said.

“Pete’s not working,” Angel said. “Pete got a ride to the beach.”
“Pete Hyde is a kid,” Candy said. “His mother is still working.”
“Well, I’m a kid, aren’t I?” Angel asked playfully.
“Well, I don’t mean you, especially,” Candy said. “What about you two?”

she asked Homer and Wally.

“Well, I’m a kid, too,” Wally said, throwing the ball back to Angel. “I just

play all day long, anyway.” Angel laughed and threw the ball back, but
Homer Wells glowered at Candy from his chest-deep position in the pool.

“Do you see what I mean, Homer?” Candy asked him. Homer allowed

himself to sink; he held his breath for a while, and when he came up for air,
Candy was going through the kitchen door. The screen door banged.

“Oh, come on!” Wally called after her. “Of course we see what you mean!”
And that was when Homer said it. Homer spat out some water and said to

Angel, “Go tell your mother that if she changes her clothes, we’ll take her to
the beach.”

said, and Wally said to Angel, “Tell her to change her mood, too.”

what you said, old boy.”

“It’s just that she is such a mother to him—I can’t help thinking of her that

way,” Homer said.

“I’m sure it’s hard,” Wally said, “not to think of her any way that you want.”
“What?” Homer asked.
“She certainly is manipulative, isn’t she?” Wally asked him. Homer ducked

his head underwater again—it was a cool place to think.

“Manipulative?” he said, when he surfaced.
“Well, someone has to know what to do,” Wally said. “Someone’s got to

make the decisions.”

bubble surfacing from the swimming pool, put his hand over his mouth and
looked at Wally, who was sitting on the knoll on the lawn, his back very
straight, the baseball mitt in his lap, the baseball held in his hand (his
throwing arm cocked). Homer Wells knew that if the word had escaped him,
the ball would have been on its fast way to him as soon as the word was in the
air—and quite probably before Homer could have ducked underwater again.

“She has a point,” said Homer Wells.
“She always does,” Wally said. “And she’s aging well, don’t you think?”
“Very well,” Homer said, climbing out of the pool. He buried his wet face in

a towel; with his eyes closed, he could see the delicate latticework of wrinkles
at the corners of Candy’s eyes and the freckles on her chest, where, over the
years, she’d allowed herself too much sun. There were also the very few but
deeper wrinkles that ran across her otherwise taut abdomen; they were stretch
marks, Homer knew; he wondered if Wally knew what they were from. And
there were the veins that had gained more prominence in the backs of Candy’s
long hands, but she was still a beautiful woman.

When Angel and Candy came out of the house—they were ready to go to

the beach—Homer watched his son closely, to see if Angel had noticed that
Homer had referred to Candy as “your mother,” but Angel was the way he
always was, and Homer couldn’t tell if Angel had caught the slip. Homer
wondered if he should tell Candy that Wally had caught it.

the comfortable seat, and Homer and Angel shared the back. All the way to
the beach, Wally just looked out the window intently, as if he were seeing the
road between Heart’s Rock and Heart’s Haven for the first time. As if, thought
Homer Wells, Wally had just abandoned the plane—over Burma—and his
chute had just opened, and he was searching for a spot to land.

That was the first time that Homer knew for certain that Candy was right.
He knows, Homer thought. Wally knows.

The apple mart never changed. It was also a family. Only Debra Pettigrew
was gone; Big Dot Taft’s kid sister had married a man from New Hampshire,
and she came back to Heart’s Rock only at Christmas. Every Christmas,
Homer Wells took Angel to St. Cloud’s. They had an early Christmas
breakfast with Candy and Wally, and a lot of opening presents; then they took
a lot more presents to St. Cloud’s. They would arrive late in the day, or in the
early evening, and have Christmas dinner with everyone. How Nurse Angela
cried! Nurse Edna cried when they left. Dr. Larch was friendly but reserved.

The apple mart was nearly as constant as St. Cloud’s—in some ways, the

apple mart was more constant, because the people didn’t change, and at St.
Cloud’s the orphans were always changing.

Herb Fowler still went out with Louise Tobey, who was still called Squeeze

Louise; she was almost fifty, now; she’d never married Herb (she’d never
been asked), yet she had acquired a wife’s matronly charms and postures.
Herb Fowler was still a very coarse, very worn-out joke (about the rubbers);
he was one of those thin, gray men in his sixties, with an outrageous pot belly
(for such a skinny fellow); he carried his paunch like something stolen and
badly hidden beneath his shirt. And Meany Hyde was uniformly fat and bald,
and as nice as ever; his wife, Florence, and Big Dot Taft still ruled the roost in
the apple mart. Only momentarily sobered by Grace Lynch’s death, these two
women (with their thigh-sized upper arms) still kept Irene Titcomb giggling
(and she still turned the side of her face with the burn scar away). Everett
Taft, who was the mellowest foreman, seemed relieved that Homer did the
hiring, now, and that the burden of hiring the extra help at harvest had been
lifted off him. And Vernon Lynch’s resentment was so monumental that it
didn’t confine itself to mere particulars—either to Homer’s being in charge,
or to Grace’s death. It was just anger that possessed him—seething and

constant and unrestrained by the ravages of Vernon’s sixty-something years.

grew, it always exerted the same pressure and the same interference. “It’s just
there, like the weather, huh?” Ira Titcomb, the beekeeper, kidded with Homer.
Ira was sixty-five, but he had another number marked on the trailer he used to
carry his hives: the number of times he’d been stung by his bees.

I was nineteen,” he said, “so that amounts to only five point two stings a year.
Pretty good, huh?” Ira asked Homer.

anticipation of the baseball whistling toward his face at the speed of Mr.
Rose’s knife work.

love with Candy since Wally came home from the war was written in pencil
(and then erased, and then rewritten) on the back of the photograph of Wally
with the crew of Opportunity Knocks. Two hundred seventy—only a few
more times than Ira Titcomb had been stung by bees. What Homer didn’t
know was that Candy also kept a record—also written in pencil, she wrote
“270” on the back of another print of the photograph of her teaching Homer
how to swim. She kept the photograph, almost casually, in the bathroom she
shared with Wally, where the photograph was always partially concealed by a
box of tissues, or a bottle of shampoo. It was a cluttered bathroom, which
Olive had outfitted properly before she died, and before Wally came home; it
had the convenient handrails Wally needed to help himself on and off the
toilet and in and out of the tub.

have a good time in there. There’s all that stuff to swing from.”

at the playground of the elementary school in Heart’s Haven. Wally and
Angel wanted to play on the jungle gym. Angel was very agile on the thing,
and Wally’s arms were so developed that he could move through it with an
alarmingly apelike strength and grace—the two of them hooting like monkeys
at Homer and Candy, who waited in the car.

“Our two children,” Homer had said to the love of his life.
“Yes, our family,” Candy had said, smiling—watching Wally and Angel

climb and swing, climb and swing.

would always think of Wally and Angel as children. Homer and Candy shared
the opinion that Wally watched too much television, which was a bad
influence on Angel, who liked to watch it with him.

take to St. Cloud’s. Of course the reception was very poor up there, which had
perhaps improved the McCarthy hearings, which had been Wilbur Larch’s
first, sustained experience with television.

“Thank God it didn’t come in clearly,” he wrote to Homer.
Nurse Caroline had been in a bad mood all that year. If the U.S. Army really

was “coddling Communists,” as Senator McCarthy claimed, Nurse Caroline
said that she’d consider joining up.

snow and zigzagging lines, said, “He looks like a drunk to me. I’ll bet he dies
young.”

“Not young enough to suit me,” Nurse Caroline said.
Finally, they gave the television away. Nurse Edna and Mrs. Grogan were

becoming addicted to it, and Larch considered that it was worse for the
orphans than organized religion. “It’s better for anyone than ether, Wilbur,”
Nurse Edna complained, but Larch was firm. He gave the thing to the
stationmaster, who (in Larch’s opinion) was the perfect sort of moron for the
invention; it was just the right thing to occupy the mind of someone who
waited all day for trains. It was Wilbur Larch who was the first man in Maine
to call a television what it was: “an idiot box.” Maine, of course—and St.
Cloud’s, especially—seemed to get everything more slowly than the rest of
the country.

But Wally loved to watch it, and Angel watched it with him whenever

Candy and Homer didn’t object. Wally argued, for example, that such
televised events as the McCarthy hearings were educational for Angel. “He
ought to know,” Wally said, “that the country is always in danger from right-
wing nut cases.”

Although Senator McCarthy lost the support of millions of people as a result

of the hearings—and although the Senate condemned him for his
“contemptuous” conduct toward a subcommittee that had investigated his
finances and for his abuse of a committee that recommended he be censured,
the board of trustees of St. Cloud’s had been favorably impressed by Senator
McCarthy. Mrs. Goodhall and Dr. Gingrich, especially, were encouraged to
complain about Nurse Caroline’s socialist views and involvements, which
they considered tinged the orphanage a shade of pink.

Nurse Caroline’s arrival had stolen a bit of the board’s fire. If Mrs. Goodhall

was at first relieved to learn that someone “new” had invaded St. Cloud’s, she
was later irritated to discover that Nurse Caroline approved of Dr. Larch. This
led Mrs. Goodhall to investigate Nurse Caroline, whose nursing credentials
were perfect but whose political activities gave Mrs. Goodhall a glow of

hope.

Larch was not only ninety-something, he was also a nonpracticing
homosexual. Now she warned the board that Dr. Larch had hired a young
Red.

“They’re all so old, they’ll be easily brainwashed,” Mrs. Goodhall said.
Dr. Gingrich, who was increasingly fascinated with the leaps of Mrs.

Goodhall’s mind, was still marveling over the confusing image of a
nonpracticing homosexual; it struck him as a brilliant accusation to make of
anyone who was slightly (or hugely) different. It was the best rumor to start
about anyone because it could never be proved or disproved. Dr. Gingrich
wished he’d considered the accusation—just as a means of provocation—
when he’d still been practicing psychiatry.

And now, not only was Dr. Larch old and homosexual and nonpracticing—

he was also in danger of being brainwashed by a young Red.

the accusation that he was a nonpracticing homosexual, because Dr. Larch
was so outspoken on the issue of Nurse Caroline’s politics.

“She’s a socialist, not a Communist!” Dr. Larch protested to the board.
“Same difference,” as they say in Maine—about so many things.
“The next thing you know,” Larch complained to his nurses, “they’ll be

asking us to denounce things.”

“What would we denounce?” Nurse Edna asked worriedly.
“Let’s make a list,” Larch said.
“The abortion laws,” Nurse Angela said.
“At the top of the list!” Larch agreed.
“Oh my!” Nurse Edna said.
“Republicans,” said Wilbur Larch. “And the board of trustees,” he added.
“Oh dear,” Nurse Edna said.
“Capitalism,” Nurse Caroline said.
“There’s never been any capital around here,” Dr. Larch said.
“Insects and scab!” Nurse Edna said. They all stared at her. “And maggots,”

Nurse Edna added. “They’re what I have to spray the apple trees for. Insects
and scab and maggots.”

As a result, Wilbur Larch dug out of a closet the old black leather bag he’d

had at the Boston Lying-In; he took the bag to a cobbler in Three Mile Falls
who also repaired ladies’ handbags and put gold initials on saddles, and he
had the cobbler engrave on his old black bag the gold initials F.S.—for Fuzzy
Stone.

at Ocean View, Wilbur Larch sent the doctor’s bag to Homer Wells. It was the
time of year, every year, when Melony took her vacation.

Most of the shipyard workers, even the electricians, took a couple of weeks

in the summer and a couple of weeks around Christmas, but Melony took a
whole month during harvest time; it made her feel good—or, maybe, young
again—to pick apples. This year, she had decided, she’d try working at Ocean
View.

wore only men’s work clothes, she still looked like a tramp; no one would
ever know that she was a shipyard’s skilled electrician, with enough money in
a savings account to buy a nice house and a couple of cars.

When Melony arrived at the apple mart, Big Dot Taft was the first to see her.

Big Dot and Florence Hyde were arranging some of the display tables,
although the only new apples they had available were the Gravensteins. They
had mostly jellies and jams and honey. Irene Titcomb was working the pie
ovens. Wally was in the office; he was on the telephone and didn’t see
Melony—and she didn’t see him.

vulgar brother, Bucky Bean. Bucky had bought what was left of the point of
land Ray Kendall had owned on Heart’s Haven Harbor. Bucky had put a very
cheap and shabby seafood restaurant there—one of Maine’s first carhop
restaurants, one of those places where young girls dressed like cheerleaders
bring you mostly fried and mostly tepid food, which you consume in your car.
The food attaches itself to the cars by means of wobbly little trays that cling
to the doors of the cars when the windows are rolled down. Homer always
wanted to take Wilbur Larch to such a place—only to hear what the old man
would say. Larch’s response, Homer was sure, would be related to his
response to television and to Senator Joe McCarthy.

Bucky Bean’s new idea was to buy the part of the orchard called Cock Hill

and sell it in one-acre lots as “summer property” with a view of the ocean.

apple mart. Candy’s opinion was that one-acre lots were too small and that the
unsuspecting new owners would be unprepared for the chemical spray used
on the apples that would regularly float over and descend upon their property
every summer. Also, the families who bought property and built houses would
doubtlessly believe it was their right to climb the fences and pick all the
apples they wanted.

“You’re just like Olive,” Bucky Bean complained. “You’ve got no

imagination concerning the future.”

appeared to be in charge but also because Melony felt comfortable with big,
fat women. Big Dot smiled to see how hefty Melony was; the two women
appeared predisposed to like each other when Melony spoke—her voice
reverberating through the near-empty stalls and surprising Meany Hyde and
Vernon Lynch, who were putting water in the John Deere’s radiator. When
Melony tried to speak normally, her voice was peculiarly deep; when she tried
to raise the pitch of her voice, most people thought she was shouting.

“Does a guy named Homer Wells work here?” Melony asked Big Dot.
“He sure does,” Big Dot said cheerfully. “Are you a pal of Homer’s?”
“I used to be,” Melony said. “I haven’t seen him in a while,” she added

coyly—at least coyly for Melony, whose love affair with Lorna had made her
occasionally self-conscious and shy with other women; her self-confidence
around men was as steadfast as ever.

“Where’s Homer?” Florence Hyde asked Meany. He was staring at Melony.
“He’s puttin’ out crates in the Frying Pan,” said Meany Hyde. Something

made him shiver.

noticed—were instinctively opening and closing, making fists and then
relaxing.

“I actually come for work,” Melony said. “I done a lot of pickin’.”
“Homer hires the pickers,” Big Dot said. “I guess you’re in luck—you bein’

old friends.”

way Melony looked at him made him not insist on that point.

“Homer’s the boss.”

“The boss?” Melony said.
Irene Titcomb giggled, and turned her burn scar away. “It’s actually a kind

of secret—who’s boss around here,” Irene said.

out of the exhaust pipe and washed over the women in the mart.

“If you’re gonna work here,” Big Dot told Melony, “you might as well know

it: that guy drivin’ the tractor is the number one asshole.”

Melony shrugged. “There’s just one?” she asked, and Big Dot laughed.
“Oh, my pies!” said Irene Titcomb, who went running off. Florence Hyde

sized Melony up, in a friendly way, and Big Dot put her meaty paw on
Melony’s shoulder as if they were lifelong pals. Irene Titcomb ran back to
them and announced that the pies were saved.

“So tell us how you know Homer Wells,” Florence Hyde said to Melony.
“From where and since when?” asked Big Dot Taft.

she told the women, her lips parting, showing the damage done to her teeth.

“You don’t say?” said Big Dot Taft.

Homer Wells and his son, Angel, were talking about masturbation—or, rather,
Homer was talking. They were taking their lunch break under one of the old
trees in the Frying Pan; they’d been putting crates out in the orchards all
morning—taking turns driving the tractor and unloading the crates. They’d
finished their sandwiches, and Angel had shaken up his soda and squirted his
father with it, and Homer had tried to find a casual way to bring up the subject
of masturbation. Candy had mentioned to Homer that the evidence on Angel’s
bedsheets suggested that this might be the time for a father-and-son
conversation regarding Angel’s obviously emerging sexuality.

“Boy, when I was your age—in Saint Cloud’s—it was really tough to beat

off with any privacy,” Homer had begun (he thought, casually).

They’d been lying on their backs in the tall grass, under the fullest tree in

the Frying Pan—the sun couldn’t filter through the lush, bent branches and all
the heavy apples.

“Really,” Angel said indifferently, after a while.
“Yup,” Homer said. “You know, I was the oldest—about your age—and I

was supposed to be in charge of all the other kids, more or less. I knew they
weren’t even old enough to have pubic hair, or they didn’t even know what to
make of their little hard-ons.”

Angel laughed. Homer laughed, too.
“So how’d you manage it?” Angel asked his father, after a while.
“I waited until I thought they were all asleep, and then I tried to keep the bed

quiet,” Homer said. “But you’ve got no idea how long it can take twelve or
fifteen boys to fall asleep!”

They both laughed some more.
“There was one other kid who was old enough to know about it,” Homer

confided. “I think he was just beginning to experiment with playing with
himself—I think the first time that he actually did it, he didn’t have any idea
what would happen. And when he actually squirted—when he ejaculated, you
know—he thought he’d hurt himself. In the dark, he probably thought he was
bleeding!”

This story was a complete fiction, but Angel Wells loved it; he laughed in a

very worldly way, which encouraged his father to go on.

“Well, he was so worried—he kept asking me to turn on the light, he said

something had broken inside him,” Homer said.

“Broken?” Angel said, and they both howled.

himself, he said, ‘Oh, God, it went off!’—as if he were talking about a gun,
and he’d just shot himself with it!”

Father and son laughed over that for a while.
Then Homer said, more seriously, “Of course I tried to explain it all to him.

It was hard to make him understand that he hadn’t done anything wrong—
because it’s natural; it’s perfectly healthy and normal, but these things have a
way of getting distorted.”

Angel was quiet now; perhaps he saw the reason for the story.
“But just imagine me trying to explain to this kid—he was quite a bit

younger than you are—that it was only natural that he would have feelings
about girls, and about sex, long before he would have the opportunity to have
anything to do with girls. Or to actually have sex,” Homer added. He had
truly labored the point into submission, and he paused to see how his son was
taking it in; Angel, who had a long stalk of grass in his mouth, lay on his back
staring at the sprawling trunk of the huge tree.

like to ask me—about anything?”

Angel gave a short laugh; then he paused. “Yes,” Angel said to his father. “I

wonder why you don’t have a girlfriend—why you don’t even seem
interested.”

invitation, but after a few seconds he realized that the question should have
been anticipated and that some reasonable answer was doubtlessly pressing
more on Angel’s mind than any truths regarding masturbation.

on me. She was something of a bully. Older than me, and at the time, she was
stronger than me!” he said, laughing.

elbows and was watching his father intently.

of the sex happening before there was a friendship, or there really being no
friendship—and, after a short while, there wasn’t any more sex, either. After
that, I’m not sure what the relationship was.”

“It was a sort of bad way to start, you mean?” Angel asked.
“Right,” his father said.
“So what happened after that?” Angel asked.
“I met Wally and Candy,” Homer said carefully. “I guess I would have

wondered if he was still alive,” Homer said quickly. “I’ve always been so
close to Wally and Candy, and then—once I had you—I started to feel that I
already had everything I wanted.”

still kind of like Candy?” he asked. “You’re not interested in anybody else?”

“Kind of,” said Homer Wells. “Have you met anybody you’re interested

in?” he asked, hoping to change the subject.

“Nobody who’d be interested in me,” his son said. “I mean, the girls I think

about are all too old to even look at me.”

up his knees and rolled on his side, poking back at his father. “Pretty soon,”
Homer said, “the girls are going to stand in line to look at you.” He grabbed
Angel in a headlock and they started wrestling. Wrestling with Angel was one
way Homer could keep in close physical contact with the boy—long after
Angel had grown self-conscious about being hugged and kissed, in public. A
fifteen-year-old boy doesn’t want his father draped all over him, but wrestling
was perfectly respectable; that was still allowed. They were wrestling so hard,
and laughing—and breathing so heavily—that they did not hear Vernon
Lynch approach them.

ground under the big tree—the way he might, tentatively, attempt to break up
a dogfight. When they saw him standing over them, they froze in an awkward
embrace—as if they’d been caught doing something they shouldn’t. “If you
quit dickin’ around,” Vernon said, “I got a message for you.”

“For me?” said Homer Wells.
“There’s a fat woman who says she knows you. She’s at the mart,” Vernon

said. Homer smiled. He knew several fat women at the mart; he assumed that
Vernon meant Big Dot Taft or Florence Hyde. Even Squeeze Louise had been
putting on weight in recent years.

tractor. “She says she wants to be a picker, and she asked for you. She knows
you.”

Homer got slowly to his feet; he’d rolled over a root of the big tree, and the

root had hurt him in the ribs. Also, Angel had stuffed grass down the back of
his shirt. Angel said to his father, “Oh, a fat woman, huh? I guess you didn’t
tell me about the fat woman.” As Homer unbuttoned his shirt to shake out the
grass, Angel poked his father’s bare stomach. That was when Angel noticed
that his father had aged. He was still a trim man, and strong from all the
orchard work he’d done, but just a bit of belly rolled over the belt of his jeans,
and his hair, tousled from the wrestling, was more flecked with gray than it

was with grass. There was something grim around the corners of Homer’s
eyes that Angel had also never noticed before.

looking at him in a panic; he started buttoning his shirt askew, and Angel had
to help him with it. “It can’t be the bully, can it?” Angel was trying to joke
with his father—their manner together was often full of joking; but Homer
wouldn’t speak, he wouldn’t even smile. Half a trailer of apple crates still
needed to be unloaded, but Homer drove too fast, dumping an occasional
crate. They had an empty trailer in no time, and on the way back to the apple
mart, Homer took the public road instead of winding through the back
orchards. The public road was faster, although Homer had told all the drivers
to keep off it whenever they could—to avoid any possible accidents with the
beach traffic along that road in the summers.

Children are most impressed with the importance of a moment when they

witness a parent breaking the parent’s own rule.

father’s shoulders, his hands on the tractor seat, his feet braced against the
trailer hitch. “You’ve got to admit, it’s a little exciting,” the boy added, but
Homer looked grim.

Homer parked the tractor and trailer by the storage barns, next to the mart.

“You can start putting on another load,” he told Angel, but he was not going
to get rid of Angel so easily. The boy dogged his footsteps to the apple mart,
where Big Dot and Florence and Irene were surrounding the implacable and
massive Melony.

“It is her, isn’t it?” Angel whispered to his father.
“Hello, Melony,” said Homer Wells. There was not a sound in the still,

summer air.

“How you doin’, Sunshine?” Melony asked him.
“Sunshine!” said Big Dot Taft.
Even Angel had to say it out loud. Imagine: his father a “Sunshine”!
But although she had waited years to see him, Melony’s gaze was riveted

not on Homer Wells but on Angel. Melony could not take her eyes off the
boy. Homer Wells, a pleasant-looking man in his forties, did not very
precisely remind Melony of the Homer Wells she had known; rather, it was
Angel who struck Melony with a force quite unexpected by her. She had not
anticipated being swept off her feet by the near-spitting image of the boy she
had known. Poor Angel felt a little wilted by the ruffian eye Melony cast over
him, but he was a young gentleman and he smiled appealingly at the stranger.

were hanging on her every word.

adopted.”

Hadn’t Homer Wells learned anything? Through those years of hard knocks,

those years of muscle and fat and betrayal and growing decidedly older, could
he still not see in Melony’s fierce, sad eyes that she possessed a quality that
could never be bullshitted?

She was disappointed in her oldest friend: that he should, after all these years,
still try to deceive her.

into the apple mart, removed a Gravenstein from a basket on the first display
table, took a sharp bite, noticed that no one seemed to be working and walked
over to the small crowd.

Homer and Angel, she stepped between them; and since her mouth was quite
full of the new apple, she was a little embarrassed to speak to the stranger.

face—those few parts of Angel she had failed to locate in her memory of
Homer Wells.

long ago, on the cider house roof, she had heard all about Melony. “This is
Missus Worthington,” Homer mumbled to Melony.

“How do you do?” Candy managed to say.
“Missus Worthington?” Melony said, her lynxlike eyes now darting from

Angel to Candy, and from Angel to Homer Wells.

That was when Wally wheeled himself out of the office and into the mart.
“Isn’t anybody working today?” he asked, in his friendly way. When he saw

there was a stranger, he was polite. “Oh, hello!” he said.

“Hi,” said Melony.
“This is my husband,” Candy said, through lots of apple.
“Your husband?” Melony said.
“This is Mister Worthington,” mumbled Homer Wells.
“Everybody calls me Wally,” Wally said.
“Melony and I were in the orphanage together,” Homer explained.
“Really?” Wally said enthusiastically. “That’s great,” he said. “Get them to

show you around. Show her the house, too,” Wally told Homer. “Maybe
you’d like to take a swim?” he asked Melony, who, for once in her life, did
not know what to say. “Dot?” Wally said to Big Dot Taft. “Get me a count of
the number of bushels of Gravs we have in storage. I got a phone order

waiting.” He turned the wheelchair very smoothly and started to roll back to
the office.

“Meany knows how many we got,” Florence Hyde said. “He was just in

there.”

he called to Melony. “Please stay for supper.”

Candy almost choked, but she managed a hard swallow.
“Thank you!” Melony called after Wally.
He didn’t need any help going in and out of the office, because Everett Taft

had (years ago) taken the threshold off and arranged for the screen door to
swing both ways—like a saloon door. Wally could come and go without
assistance.

behind the wheelchair; she could not control her hands. She wanted to touch
Angel, to hug him—she’d wanted to get her hands on Homer Wells for years,
but now she didn’t know what she wanted to do to him. If she’d suddenly
dropped to all fours, or had crouched into a stance more suitable for a fight,
she knew that Homer Wells would be prepared; she noticed he had no control
of his hands, either—his fingers were playing pitty-pat against his thighs.
Hardest for Melony was to recognize that there was no love for her in his
eyes; he looked like a trapped animal—there was no enthusiasm or curiosity
about seeing her in any part of him. She thought that if she’d opened her
mouth, beginning with the boy—how he was clearly no orphan!—Homer
Wells would be at her throat before she could spit out the story.

No one seemed to remember that Melony had come—among other reasons

—for a job. Angel said, “Would you like to see the pool first?”

smiled at Homer with such an uncharacteristic warmth—which revealed
everything about her bad teeth—that Homer shivered. The apple, from which
only one, uncomfortable bite had been taken, hung like a lead weight at the
end of Candy’s limp arm.

She dropped the uneaten apple, then laughed at herself.

“I’ll show you the orchards,” Homer mumbled.
“You don’t have to show me no orchards, Sunshine,” Melony said. “I seen

lots of orchards, before.”

“Oh,” he said.
“Sunshine,” Candy said blankly.
Angel poked his father in the back as they were walking toward the house

and pool; Angel still thought that this surprise was great and unexpected fun.

Homer turned briefly and frowned at his son, which Angel found all the more
amusing. While the boy was showing Melony the swimming pool—and
making special note of the ramp for Wally’s wheelchair—Candy and Homer
awaited her arrival in the kitchen.

“She knows,” Homer said to Candy.
“What?” Candy said. “What does she know?”
“Melony knows everything,” said Homer Wells, in a trance of almost ether

intensity.

“How could she?” Candy asked him. “Did you tell her?”
“Don’t be ridiculous,” Homer said. “She just knows—she always knows.”
“Don’t you be ridiculous,” Candy said crossly.
“Wally’s a great swimmer,” Angel explained to Melony. “In the ocean, he

just needs to get carried out past the breakers. I can carry him.”

than your dad ever was.”

said. “Too bad you don’t swim. You could stay in the shallow end, or I could
teach you how to float. Candy taught my dad how to swim.”

a little; she needed to jounce very little to make the board dip close to the
water. “If I fell in, I’ll bet you could save me,” she said to Angel, who
couldn’t tell if the big woman was being flirtatious or threatening—or if she
was idly fooling around. That was what was exciting about her, Angel
thought: she gave him the impression that—from one minute to the next—she
might do anything.

“I could probably save you, if you were drowning,” Angel offered

cautiously. But Melony retreated from the end of the diving board, which lent
to her step the sense of springing power that one detects in the larger
members of the cat family.

“Incredible,” she repeated, her eyes trying to take in everything.
“Want to see the house now?” Angel asked her. She was making him

nervous.

downstairs; Homer showed her the upstairs. In the hallway between Homer’s
and Angel’s rooms, Melony whispered to him, “Boy, you really done all right
for yourself. How’d you manage it, Sunshine?” How she feasted on him with
her tawny eyes! “You even got a great view!” she pointed out, sitting on the
master bed and looking out the window.

enjoying himself, and still curious. The impact that the thuglike nature of his
father’s first girlfriend had made on the boy was considerable; if Angel had
been troubled in trying to imagine why his father chose such a solitary life,
the violent apparition that had presented herself today had done much to
reassure him. If this menacing woman had been his father’s first experience, it
was more understandable (to Angel) why Homer had been reluctant to repeat
the relationship.

grateful for the time; he needed it—to convince Candy and Angel to go back
to work, to leave him alone with Melony. “She wants a job,” he told them
forcefully. “I need to have a little time with her, alone.”

made her squint her pretty eyes.

Mirrors had never been Melony’s friends, but the mirror in Homer’s

bathroom was especially harsh to her. She went through the medicine cabinet
quickly; for no reason, she dumped some of the pills down the toilet. She
began ejecting razor blades from a crude, metal dispenser; she emptied the
dispenser before she could make herself stop. She cut her finger trying to pick
up one of the blades from the floor. She had her finger stuck in her mouth
when she first looked at herself in the mirror. She held the razor blade in her
other hand while she reviewed the forty-something years she saw in her face.
Oh, she had never been attractive, she had never been nice, but once she had
been an efficient weapon, she thought; now she wasn’t so sure. She held the
razor blade against the pouch under one eye; she shut that eye, as if the eye
itself couldn’t watch what she was going to do. Then she did nothing. After a
while, she put the blade down on the edge of the sink and cried.

Later, she found a cigarette lighter; Candy must have left it in the bathroom;

Homer didn’t smoke; Wally couldn’t climb stairs. She used the lighter to melt
the handle of Homer’s toothbrush; she sunk the razor blade in the softest part
and waited for the handle to harden. When she clutched the brush end in her
hand, she had quite a nice little weapon, she thought.

of trustees; the paper was so old, she had to be careful not to tear it. How
those questions spun her mind around! She threw the toothbrush with the
razor blade in the sink, then she picked it up again, then she put it in the
medicine cabinet, then she took it out. She was sick once and flushed the
toilet twice.

Melony stayed upstairs in the bathroom a long time. When she came

of her real feelings about finding Homer in these surroundings, and in what
she presumed was a sleazy situation. She might have enjoyed a few minutes
of the discomfort she had caused him, but by the time she came downstairs
she was no longer enjoying herself and her disappointment in Homer Wells
was even deeper than her steadfast anger—it was nearly level with grief.

cripple’s wife and pretendin’ your own child ain’t your own,” Melony said to
Homer Wells. “You of all people—you, an orphan,” she reminded him.

“It’s not quite like that,” he started to tell her, but she shook her huge head

and looked away from him.

“I got eyes,” Melony said. “I can see what it’s like—it’s like shit. It’s

ordinary, middle-class shit—bein’ unfaithful and lyin’ to the kids. You of all
people!” Melony said. She had her hands thrust in her pockets; she took them
out and clasped them behind her back; then she jammed them back in her
pockets again. Every time she moved her hands, Homer flinched.

but this was not the attack he had expected. He had imagined that he would,
one day—when he saw her again—be a match for her, but now he knew that
he would never be a match for Melony.

“Do you think I was always lookin’ for you—only to give you a bad time?”

“I didn’t know you were looking for me,” said Homer Wells.
“I had you figured all wrong,” said Melony. Looking at her, Homer Wells

realized that he’d had Melony figured all wrong, too. “I always thought you’d
end up like the old man.”

“Like Larch?” Homer said.
“Of course, like Larch!” Melony snapped at him. “I figured you for that—

you know, the missionary. The do-gooder with his nose in the air.”

“I don’t see Larch quite that way,” Homer said.
“Don’t be snotty to me!” Melony cried, her raw face streaked with tears.

“You’ve got your nose in the air—I got that part right. But you ain’t exactly
no missionary. You’re a creep! You knocked up somebody you shouldn’t ’a’
been fuckin’ in the first place, and you couldn’t even come clean about it to
your own kid. Some missionary! Ain’t that brave? In my book, Sunshine,
that’s a creep,” Angel told him.

how her life had been.

had constricted his breathing and made him ache. A vomit taste was in his
mouth; he tried to brush his teeth but he cut himself in the hand before he saw
the blade. He felt nearly as paralyzed above the waist as he knew Wally must
feel below. When he reached for the towel by the shower door, he saw what
else was wrong, he saw what was missing from the bathroom: the blank
questionnaire, the one he’d never returned to the board of trustees of St.
Cloud’s was gone. It didn’t take Homer Wells long to imagine how Melony
might answer some of the questions.

the orphanage immediately, and got Nurse Edna on the phone.

“Oh, Homer!” she cried, so glad to hear his voice.
“This is important,” he told her. “I saw Melony.”
“Oh, Melony!” Nurse Edna cried happily. “Missus Grogan will be thrilled!”
“Melony has a copy of the questionnaire,” Homer said. “Please tell Doctor

Larch—I don’t think this is good news. That old questionnaire from the board
of trustees.”

“Oh, dear,” Nurse Edna said.
“Of course she might never fill it out,” Homer said, “but she has it—it says

where to send it, right on the thing. And I don’t know where she’s gone; I
don’t know where she came from.”

“Was she married?” Nurse Edna asked. “Was she happy?”
Jesus Christ, thought Homer Wells. Nurse Edna always shouted into the

telephone; she was so old that she remembered only the days of bad
connections.

“Just tell Doctor Larch that Melony has the questionnaire. I thought he

should know,” said Homer Wells.

“Yes, yes!” Nurse Edna shouted. “But was she happy?”
“I don’t think so,” Homer said.
“Oh, dear.”

“I thought she was going to stay for supper,” Wally said, serving the
swordfish.

“I thought she wanted a job,” Angel said.
“What’s she been doing with herself?” Wally asked.
“If she wanted to pick apples,” Candy said, “she can’t be doing too much

with herself.”

“I don’t think she needed the job,” Homer said.
“She just wanted to look you over, Pop,” Angel said, and Wally laughed.

Angel had told Wally that Melony had been Homer’s girlfriend, which Wally
had thought was very funny.

to Angel.

“Oh, come on, Wally,” Candy said. “That wasn’t serious.”
“You left something out,” Angel said to his father; Angel pointed his finger

at Homer.

“Yes,” Homer admitted. “But Debra Pettigrew wasn’t anyone special.”
“We used to double-date,” Wally told Angel. “Your old man usually got the

back seat.”

“Come on, Wally!” Candy said. She’d given Homer and Angel too many

asparagus; she had to take some back, or there wouldn’t be any for Wally or
herself.

Angel. “He didn’t know what drive-ins were for!”

husband.

“Of course I know!” Angel said, laughing.
“Of course he knows!” Wally said, also laughing.
“Only Bedouins don’t know,” said Homer Wells, trying to go along with the

fun.

orchards with Pete Hyde; after supper, almost every night, the boys had a
game—they tried to drive through all the orchards before it was dark. Homer
wouldn’t let them drive in the orchards after dark—not after the apple crates
had been put out for the pickers.

Wally liked the twilight by the swimming pool. From the kitchen window,

Homer and Candy could see him sitting in the wheelchair; he had tipped his
head back, as if he were staring at the sky, but he was watching the spiral
drifting of a hawk over the orchard called Cock Hill—some smaller birds
were pestering the hawk, flying dangerously close to it, trying to drive it
away.

“It’s time to tell,” Homer said to Candy.
“No, please,” Candy said; she reached around him, where he was working at

the sink, and dropped the broiler rack that the swordfish had been cooked on
into the soapy water. The rack was greasy and stuck all over with charred bits
of fish, but Homer Wells immediately pulled it out of the water—without
letting it soak—and started scrubbing it.

“It’s time to tell everyone everything,” said Homer Wells. “No more waiting

and seeing.”

to face her. He just kept scrubbing the broiler rack.

“I’ll work it out with you, any way you want to do it,” Homer said.

“Whether you want to be with me, when I tell Angel—whether you want me
with you, when you tell Wally. Any way you want it, it’ll be okay,” he said.

her face between his shoulder blades and bit him in the back. He had to turn
toward her then; he had to push her away.

“You’re going to make Angel hate me!” Candy cried.
“Angel will never hate you,” Homer said to her. “To Angel, you’ve always

been just what you are—a good mother.”

might attack him, but she just kept wrenching the tongs, open and closed, in
her hands.

“Wally will hate me!” she cried miserably.
“You’re always telling me that Wally knows,” said Homer Wells. “Wally

loves you.”

“And you don’t love me, anymore, do you?” Candy said; she started to

blubber; then she threw the serving tongs at Homer, then she clenched her
fists against her thighs. She bit down so hard on her lower lip that it bled;
when Homer tried to dab at her lip with a clean dish towel, she pushed him
away.

“I love you, but we’re becoming bad people,” he said.
She stamped her foot. “We’re not bad people!” she cried. “We’re trying to

do the right thing, we’re trying not to hurt anybody!”

“We’re doing the wrong thing,” said Homer Wells. “It’s time to do

everything right.”

In a panic, Candy looked out the window; Wally was gone from his position

at the far corner of the deep end of the pool. “We’ll talk later,” she whispered
to Homer. She grabbed an ice cube out of someone’s drinking glass; she held
the cube to her lower lip. “I’ll see you by the pool.”

“We can’t talk about this around the pool,” he told her.
“I’ll meet you at the cider house,” she said; she was looking everywhere for

Wally, wondering what door he’d come in—any second.

“That’s not a good idea, to meet there,” said Homer Wells.
“Just take a walk!” she snapped at him. “You walk there your way, I’ll walk

there my way—I’ll meet you, Goddamn it,” she said. She made it into the
bathroom before Homer heard Wally at the terrace door.

at wheelchair level, like a sink for children in a kindergarten, like the sinks at
St. Cloud’s (she remembered). She knelt on the bathroom floor and hung her

head in the sink; she turned her face under a faucet; the cold water was
continuous against her lip.

over the broiler rack.

“Kind of messy tonight,” Homer said.
“I’m sorry,” Wally said genuinely. “Where’s Candy?” he asked.
“I think she’s in the bathroom.”
“Oh,” said Wally. He wheeled himself over to the corner of the kitchen

where the serving tongs and a few broken bits of asparagus were on the floor.
He leaned down and picked up the tongs, which he delivered to Homer at the
sink. “Want to see the last couple of innings of the ball game?” he asked
Homer. “Let Candy do the fucking dishes.” Wally wheeled himself out of the
kitchen; he waited in the driveway for Homer Wells to bring the car around.

the wheelchair; it was just a Little League game, and Homer could drive the
Jeep right up to the foul line and they could watch the game from the car
seats. The town was thrilled to have a lighted field, although it was stupid to
play Little League games after dark; it kept the little kids up later than was
necessary, and the field wasn’t that well lit—home runs and long foul balls
were always lost. The tiny infielders seemed to lose the high pop-ups. But
Wally loved watching the kids play; when Angel had played, Wally had never
missed a game. Angel was too old for Little League now, and he found
watching the games the depths of boredom.

(who hated baseball). A worried fat boy was pitching; he took the longest
time between pitches, as if he were waiting for it to grow so dark (or for the
lights to fail so completely) that the batter could no longer see the ball at all.

“You know what I miss?” Wally asked Homer Wells.
“What’s that?” said Homer, who dreaded the answer. Maybe walking,

Homer thought—or maybe he’s going to say, “Loving my wife; that’s what I
miss.”

But Wally said, “Flying. I really miss flying. I miss being up there.” Wally

was not watching the ball game but looking above the tall field lights at some
point high in the darkness. “Above everything,” he said. “That’s how it was.”

“I never did it,” said Homer Wells.
“My God, that’s true!” Wally said, genuinely shocked. “That’s right, you’ve

never flown! My God, you’d love it. We’ve got to arrange that, somehow.
And Angel would really find it exciting,” Wally added. “It’s the thing I miss
most.”

to the gearshift and popped the Jeep into neutral. “Cut the engine just a
second,” he said to Homer. “Let’s just coast.” Homer turned off the key and
the Jeep ambled silently along. “Cut the headlights, too,” Wally said. “Just for
a second.” And Homer Wells cut the lights. They could see the lights from the
Ocean View house ahead of them, and both of them knew the road so well
that they felt fairly secure just freewheeling in the darkness, but then the trees
rose up and cut their view of the lighted house, and there was an unfamiliar
dip in the road. For just a moment they seemed to be completely lost, possibly
plunging off the road into the dark trees, and Homer Wells turned the
headlights back on.

of them, gleaming in the headlights, the wheelchair was parked in waiting.
When Homer carried Wally from the Jeep to the wheelchair, Wally let both
his arms lock around Homer’s neck. “Don’t ever think I’m not grateful to
you, for all you’ve done, old boy,” Wally told Homer, who put him very
gently in the chair.

“Come on,” Homer said.
“No, I mean it. I know how much you’ve done for me, and I don’t usually

get the opportunity to say how grateful I really am,” Wally said. He kissed
Homer smack between the eyes, then, and Homer straightened up, clearly
embarrassed.

dismissed this with a wave; he was already wheeling himself toward the
house.

“It’s not the same, old boy,” Wally said, and Homer went to park the Jeep.
That night when Homer put Angel to bed, Angel said, “You know, you

really don’t have to put me to bed anymore.”

“I don’t do it because I have to,” Homer said. “I like to.”
“You know what I think?” Angel said.
“What’s that?” asked Homer, who dreaded the answer.
“I think you ought to try having a girlfriend,” Angel said cautiously. Homer

laughed.

“Maybe when you try having one, I’ll try one, too,” Homer said.
“Sure, we can double-date!” Angel said.
“I get the back seat,” Homer said.
“Sure, I’d rather get to drive, anyway,” Angel said.
“Not for long, you won’t rather drive,” his father told him.
“Sure!” Angel said, laughing. Then he asked his father: “Was Debra

Pettigrew big like Melony?”

that big—not when I knew her.”

“There’s no way Big Dot Taft’s sister could have been small,” Angel said.
“Well, I never said she was small,” Homer said, and they both laughed. It

was a lighthearted enough moment for Homer to lean over Angel and kiss the
boy—smack between the eyes, where Wally had just kissed Homer. It was a
good place to kiss Angel, in Homer’s opinion, because he liked to smell his
son’s hair.

“Good night, I love you,” Homer said.
“I love you. Good night, Pop,” Angel said, but when Homer was almost out

the door, Angel asked him, “What’s the thing you love best?”

“You,” Homer told his son. “I love you best.”
“Next to me,” said Angel Wells.
“Candy and Wally,” Homer said, making them as close to one word as his

tongue could manage.

“Next to them,” Angel said.
“Well, Doctor Larch—and all of them, in Saint Cloud’s, I guess,” said

Homer Wells.

“And what’s the best thing you ever did?” Angel asked his father.
“I got you,” Homer said softly.
“Next best,” Angel said.
“Well, I guess it was meeting Candy and Wally,” Homer said.
“You mean, when you met them?” Angel asked.
“I guess so,” said Homer Wells.
“Next best,” Angel insisted.
“I saved a woman’s life, once,” Homer said. “Doctor Larch was away. The

woman had convulsions.”

his father had become a highly qualified assistant to Dr. Larch; Homer had
never told him about the abortions. “What else?” Angel asked his father.

Tell him now, thought Homer Wells, tell him all of it. But what he said to his

son was, “Nothing else, really. I’m no hero. I haven’t done any best things, or
even any one best thing.”

“That’s okay, Pop,” Angel said cheerfully. “Good night.”
“Good night,” said Homer Wells.
Downstairs, he couldn’t tell if Wally and Candy had gone to bed, or if Wally

was in bed alone; the bedroom door was closed, and there was no light
coming from the crack under the door. But someone had left a light on in the
kitchen, and the outdoor light on the post at the head of the driveway was still
on. He went to the apple-mart office to read the mail; with the light on in the
office, Candy would know where he was. And if she’d already gone to the

cider house, he could walk there from the office; it would be smart, in that
case, to leave the office light on and not turn it out until he came back from
the cider house. That way, if Wally woke up and saw the light, he’d figure that
Homer or Candy was still working in the office.

visit, startled Homer. He almost didn’t want to open it. The old man has
probably sent me enema bags! Homer Wells thought. He was shocked to see
the black leather doctor’s bag; the leather was scuffed and soft, and the brass
clasp was so tarnished that its luster was as dull as the cinch buckle of an old
saddle, but everything that was worn and used about the bag’s appearance
only made the gold initials that much brighter.

F.S.

Homer Wells opened the bag and sniffed deeply inside it; he was

anticipating the hearty and manly smell of old leather, but mixed with the
leather smell were the feminine traces of ether’s tangy perfume. That was
when—in one whiff—Homer Wells detected something of the identity that
Dr. Larch had fashioned for Fuzzy Stone.

“Doctor Stone,” Homer said aloud, remembering when Larch had addressed

him as if he were Fuzzy.

He didn’t want to walk back to the house to put the doctor’s bag away, but

he didn’t want to leave the bag in the office, either; when he came back to the
office to turn out the light, he thought he might forget the bag. And the thing
about a good doctor’s bag is that it’s comfortable to carry. That was why he
took it with him to the cider house. The bag was empty, of course—which
didn’t feel quite right to Homer—so he picked some Gravensteins and a
couple of early Macs on his way to the cider house and put the apples in the
bag. Naturally, the apples rolled back and forth; that didn’t feel quite
authentic. “Doctor Stone,” he mumbled once, his head nodding as he took
high steps through the tall grass.

Candy had been waiting for him for a while, long enough so her nerves were

shot. He thought that if it had happened the other way around—if she’d been
the one to break things off—he would have been as upset as she was.

It was heartbreaking for him to see that she had made up one of the beds.

The clean linen and the blankets had already been put in the cider house in
anticipation of the picking crew’s arrival, the mattresses rolled and waiting at
the opposite ends of the beds. Candy had made up the bed the farthest from
the kitchen doorway. She’d brought a candle from the house, and had lit it—it
gave the harsh barracks a softer light, although candles were against the rules.
Recently, Homer had found it necessary to emphasize candles on the list; one

of the pickers had started a small fire with one some years ago.

PLEASE DON’T SMOKE IN BED—AND NO CANDLES, PLEASE!

was the way he’d written that rule.

The candlelight was faint; it couldn’t be seen from the fancy house.
Candy had not undressed herself, but she was sitting on the bed—and she

had brushed her hair out. Her hairbrush was on the apple crate that served as a
night table, and this commonplace article of such familiarity and domesticity
gave Homer Wells (with the black doctor’s bag in his hand) a shiver of such
magnitude that he envisioned himself as a helpless physician paying a house
call to someone with not long to live.

“I’m sorry,” he said softly to her. “We’ve tried it—we’ve certainly tried—

but it just doesn’t work. Only the truth will work.” His voice was croaking at
his own pomposity.

Candy sat with her knees together and her hands in her lap; she was

shivering. “Do you really think Angel’s old enough to know all this?” she
whispered, as if the flickering room were full of sleeping apple pickers.

“He’s old enough to beat off, he’s old enough to know what drive-ins are for

—I think he’s old enough,” said Homer Wells.

“Don’t be coarse,” Candy said.
“I’m sorry,” he said again.
“There’s always so much to do during harvest,” Candy said; she picked at

her white, summery dress as if there were lint on it (but it was spotlessly
clean), and Homer Wells remembered that Senior Worthington had this habit
—that in Senior’s case it was a symptom of his Alzheimer’s disease and that
Dr. Larch had even known the name for the symptom. What did the
neurologists call it? Homer tried to remember.

“We’ll wait and tell them after the harvest, then,” Homer said. “We’ve

waited fifteen years. I guess we can wait another six weeks.”

She stretched out on her back on the thin bed, as if she were a little girl

waiting to be tucked in and kissed good night in a foreign country. He went to
the bed and sat uncomfortably on the edge of it, at her waist, and she put her
hand on his knee. He covered her hand with his hand.

“Oh, Homer,” she said, but he wouldn’t turn to look at her. She took his

hand and pulled it under her dress and made him touch her; she wasn’t
wearing anything under the dress. He didn’t pull his hand away, but he
wouldn’t allow his hand to be more than a deadweight presence against her.
“What do you imagine will happen?” she asked him coolly—after she
realized that his hand was dead.

“I can’t imagine anything,” he said.

“Wally will throw me out,” Candy said, blandly and without self-pity.
“He won’t,” Homer said. “And if he did, I wouldn’t—then you’d be with

me. That’s why he won’t.”

“What will Angel do?” Candy asked.
“What he wants,” Homer said. “I imagine he’ll be with you when he wants,

and with me when he wants.” This part was hard to say—and harder to
imagine.

“He’ll hate me,” Candy said.
“He won’t,” said Homer Wells.
She pushed his hand away from her and he returned the dead thing to his

own lap; in another moment, her hand found his knee again, and he held her
hand lightly there—at the wrist, almost as if he were taking her pulse. At his
feet, the shabby doctor’s bag, heavy with apples, crouched like a cat drawn in
upon itself and waiting; in the flickering room, the doctor’s bag looked like
the only natural object—that bag would look at home wherever anyone took
it; it was a bag that belonged wherever it was.

“Where will you go?” Candy asked him after a while.
“Will I have to go anywhere?” he asked her.
“I imagine so,” Candy said.
Homer Wells was trying to imagine it all when he heard the car. Candy must

have heard it in the same instant because she sat up and blew out the candle.
They sat holding each other on the bed, listening to the car approach them.

tapping and something like the tailpipe was loose and rattled. The car was
heavy and low; they heard it scrape on the high crown of the dirt road through
the orchard, and the driver had to be familiar with the way through the
orchard because the headlights were off—that’s how the car had gotten so
close without their knowing it was coming.

Candy hurried to unmake the bed; in the darkness, she probably wasn’t

refolding the blankets and the linen very neatly, and Homer had to help her
roll up the mattress.

“It’s Wally!” Candy whispered, and indeed the car sounded like the

Cadillac, which (since Raymond Kendall’s death) had lost its pinpoint timing.
In fact, Homer remembered, the Cadillac’s muffler was loose, and it had a
rebuilt engine, which already needed a valve job. And it was too heavy and
low-built a car for proper use on the ragged dirt roads that wound through the
orchards.

But how could Wally have managed it? wondered Homer Wells. Wally

would have had to crawl to the Cadillac (Homer himself had parked it behind
one of the storage barns, where the road was much too rocky and broken up

for the wheelchair).

was not unknown to a few locals; the orchard roads had been lovers’ lanes for
more than one couple.

The heavy car pulled right up to the cider house wall. Candy and Homer felt

the front bumper nudge against the building.

close? The motor knocked for a while after the key was turned off. And then
there was that ping of engine heat from the heavy car as it settled into place.

door, and Candy caught hold of him, pulling him back against her.

could not make herself move out of the darkest corner of the cider house.

hand groped for the light switch, his hand brushing over his new list of rules.
He had not heard the car door open, but he suddenly heard low voices; he
paused, with his hand on the light switch. Oh Wally, this isn’t fair! he thought;
if there were voices Homer knew that Wally had brought Angel with him.
That would have made it easier for Wally to get to the Cadillac—Angel could
have brought the car around for him. But regardless of the torment that
burdened Wally, Homer was angry at his friend for involving Angel. But
wasn’t Angel involved in it, anyway? Homer wondered. (Now they turned the
headlights on—to light their way to the door?)

way matter? Homer Wells turned on the light, which momentarily blinded
him. He thought that he must be as lit up as a Christmas tree in the cider
house door. And, he thought, wasn’t it fitting that it had been the Cadillac that
had rescued him from St. Cloud’s, and now here was the Cadillac—in a way,
come to rescue him again? For here he was, with the well-worn doctor’s bag
in hand, at last prepared to tell the truth—ready, at last, to take his medicine.

In the bright light, he nervously picked the imaginary lint off his clothes. He

remembered what the neurologists call it: carphologia.

He tightened his grip on Dr. Larch’s bag and peered into the darkness.

Suddenly, it was clear to him—where he was going. He was only what he
always was: an orphan who’d never been adopted. He had managed to steal
some time away from the orphanage, but St. Cloud’s had the only legitimate
claim to him. In his forties, a man should know where he belongs.

Dr. Larch began another letter to Harry Truman, before he remembered that
Eisenhower had been President for a few years. He had written several letters

to Roosevelt after Roosevelt had died, and he’d written many more to
Eleanor, but the Roosevelts had never written back. Harry Truman had never
written back, either, and Larch couldn’t remember if he’d written to Mrs.
Truman, too, or to Truman’s daughter—whichever one it was hadn’t
answered, either.

tried to recall how he’d begun the last one. He’d begun “Dear General,” but
after that he couldn’t remember; he’d said something about how he’d been a
doctor to the “troops” in World War I—he’d tried to sneak up on his real
subject, a kind of flanking maneuver. Maybe it was time to try Mrs.
Eisenhower. But when Larch wrote “Dear Mamie,” he felt ridiculous.

Eisenhower about abortion. He tore the letter out of the typewriter; out of the
blue, he decided that the President’s head resembled that of a baby.

to fool around. He told Nurse Angela that there would be a meeting after
supper, after the children had been put to bed.

Cloud’s, except that most uncomfortable meeting with the board of trustees;
she assumed that if there was going to be another meeting, the board was
probably involved.

“Oh dear, a meeting,” Nurse Edna said; she fretted all day.
Mrs. Grogan was worried, too. She was concerned about where the meeting

would take place—as if it would be possible to miss it or not find it.

“I think we can narrow down the possibilities,” Nurse Caroline assured her.
All day Wilbur Larch worked in Nurse Angela’s office. No babies were born

that day; and the one woman who wanted an abortion was welcomed, and
made comfortable, and told that she could have her abortion tomorrow.
Wilbur Larch would not leave Nurse Angela’s office, not even for lunch, not
even for tea, and not even for the Lord’s work.

Stone, that good doctor; Larch was also writing the obituary of Homer Wells.
Poor Homer’s heart: the rigors of an agricultural life and a high-cholesterol
diet—“An orphan is a meat eater, an orphan is always hungry,” wrote Wilbur
Larch.

Fuzzy Stone as “lean and mean.” After all, who among the orphans had ever
dared to challenge Dr. Larch? And here was Fuzzy Stone threatening to turn
his old mentor in! Not only did he dare to attack Dr. Larch’s beliefs regarding
the abortions, but also Fuzzy had such strong views on the subject that he

repeatedly threatened to expose Dr. Larch to the board. And now Fuzzy’s zeal
was fired with the self-righteousness of a true missionary, for Larch knew that
the safest place for Dr. Stone to be practicing medicine was where the board
could never trace him. Fuzzy was fighting diarrhea amid the dying children of
Asia. Larch had just read an article in The Lancet about diarrhea being the
number one killer of kids in that part of the world. (Homer Wells, who did not
know that his heart had given out, had read the same article.) The other little
details about Burma and India—which lent such a missionary authenticity to
Fuzzy’s angry letters to Wilbur Larch—were things that Larch remembered
hearing about Wally’s excruciating travels there.

voices—to the board of trustees. He would have preferred ether to supper,
although supper, he knew, would make him more stable for the meeting that
his bullied staff was dreading. Larch read such a short passage from Jane
Eyre that every girl in the girls’ division was still awake when he left them,
and he read such a short section of David Copperfield that two of the boys
complained.

told them. “David didn’t have a very big day.”

made them all meet in Nurse Angela’s office, as if he took comfort from the
litter of paper and the gloomy, surrounding presence of his massive A Brief
History of St. Cloud’s, which was gathered around him. He leaned on his
overworked typewriter as if the machine were a podium.

using the word like a gavel to call the meeting to order. “Now we’re going to
head them off at the pass.”

Nurse Edna wondered if he’d been sneaking down to the train station to

watch the Westerns on the TV with the stationmaster; Nurse Edna did this
quite often. She liked Roy Rogers better than Hopalong Cassidy; she wished
Roy wouldn’t sing; she preferred Tom Mix to them all. Although she loathed
the Lone Ranger, she had a soft spot in her heart for Tonto—for all the
world’s sidekicks.

“Whom are we heading off?” Nurse Caroline asked aggressively.
“And you!” Dr. Larch said to Nurse Caroline, pointing his finger at her.

“You’re my top gun. You’re the one who’s going to pull the trigger. You get to
fire the first shot.”

Mrs. Grogan, who feared for her own sanity, feared that Dr. Larch had

finally lost his. Nurse Angela suspected Larch had been slipping for a long
time. Nurse Edna loved him so much that she couldn’t judge him. Nurse

Caroline just wanted the facts.

shoot?”

whistle on me—on all of us here.”

“I’ll do no such thing!” Nurse Caroline said.
Very patiently, he explained it to them. It was so simple—to him it was

simple because he’d been thinking of it for years. It was not simple to the rest
of them, and he had to take them very slowly through the steps toward their
salvation.

must believe that her response would be negative—not because Melony was
necessarily negative, as Larch pointed out to Mrs. Grogan (who was ready to
defend her), but because Melony was angry. “She was born angry, she will
always be angry, and even if she means us no harm, one day she will be angry
enough—about something, about anything—so that she will respond to the
questionnaire. And she’ll say what she knows,” Larch added, “because,
whatever else Melony is, she’s no liar.”

Therefore, he argued, he wanted the board to hear that he was an abortionist

from someone else first. It was the only way they might be saved. Nurse
Caroline was the logical betrayer; she was young, she was relatively new, she
had struggled with her conscience for an acceptably short period of time, and
she had decided that she could remain silent no longer. Mrs. Grogan and the
older nurses had been bullied into accepting a doctor’s authority as absolute;
Nurse Caroline would maintain that they were not to blame. Nurse Caroline,
however, had a challenging attitude toward the authority figures of this (or of
any) society. She would present her protest as a matter of women’s rights—
that even nurses should never allow doctors to tyrannize them; that when a
doctor was breaking the law, even if it was not a nurse’s role to challenge him,
it was her right and her moral obligation to expose him. Larch was sure that
Mrs. Goodhall would like that bit about “moral obligation”—Mrs. Goodhall
doubtlessly labored under the illusion that her own moral obligations were the
guiding lights of her life, and Dr. Larch felt that it was the overwhelming
burden of these obligations that had made her a sour, joyless woman.

awaiting a parent’s return to the nest; their heads were sunk into their
shoulders, their faces were tilted up, their mouths silently forming the words
they heard Larch speak—in anticipation of swallowing worms.

see; she had a basically brave and a fundamentally political conscience; and
once she grasped the portrait of the board as her enemy, she was most
attentive to her commander who had so arduously plotted the board’s defeat.
It was a kind of revolt, and Nurse Caroline was all for revolution.

right-wingers on the board; they’ve colored you pink. Now you color yourself
Christian. They’re not only going to end up forgiving you, they’re also going
to want to promote you. They’re going to want you in charge.

“And you,” Larch said, pointing to Nurse Angela.
“Me?” said Nurse Angela; she looked frightened, but Larch knew that she

would be the perfect one to recommend Fuzzy Stone. Hadn’t she named him?
And hadn’t she almost dared, all those times, to join Fuzzy in his righteous
debate with Dr. Larch? Because Fuzzy knew them all, and loved them all; he
knew what they needed, and his beliefs (regarding the abortions) were so
much more in sympathy with Nurse Angela’s own beliefs.

“They are?” Nurse Angela said. “But I believe in abortion!”
“Of course you do!” Larch said. “And if you want Saint Cloud’s to continue

to offer abortions, you better pretend that you’re on the other side. You’d
better all pretend.”

“What do I pretend, Wilbur?” Nurse Edna asked.
“That it’s a great load off your conscience—that I have been caught,” Larch

told her. Perhaps, if Fuzzy Stone came back, Nurse Edna’s conscience would
let her sleep. And Mrs. Grogan could lighten up on the praying; perhaps she
would not be so driven to pray, if they had that wonderfully decent Dr. Stone
around.

Not that we don’t all adore Dr. Larch! Nurse Angela would tell the board.

And not that the poor old man didn’t believe in himself, and in what he was
doing—and for whom he was doing it. He was always devoted to the orphans.
It was just that this social problem got the best of him and of his judgment.
And how this issue has upset us all! How it has taken its toll!

between her shoulders—she was more in love with him than ever. He really
was devoted to his orphans; he really would do anything for them.

“But what will happen to you, Wilbur—if we expose you?” Nurse Edna

asked, a slim tear making its difficult way down her wrinkled cheek.

retire.”

“You won’t go away, will you?” Mrs. Grogan asked him.
“I wouldn’t get very far, if I tried,” he said.
He had been so convincing about Fuzzy Stone—he had presented them with

such marvelous details—that Nurse Caroline was the only one to spot the
problem.

she asked Dr. Larch.

“Homer belongs here,” Nurse Angela said, by rote; that Homer Wells

belonged to St. Cloud’s was (to Nurse Angela) as obvious a fact as the
weather—even if this fact (to Homer) had been his life’s crucible.

all the old people. “When did you last talk to him about it?” she asked Larch.
“I’ve talked to him pretty recently, and he believes in your right to perform
them—he even sent me here, to help you. And he believes it should be legal
—to have one. But he also says that he could never, personally, do it—to him,
it’s killing someone. That’s how he sees it. That’s what he says.”

Caroline looked at all of them, she saw them as if they were dinosaurs—not
just prehistoric but also almost willfully too large for the world. How could
the planet ever provide enough for them? It was not a very socialist thought,
but this was the conviction with which her heart sank as she looked at them.

“Homer Wells thinks it’s killing someone,” Nurse Caroline repeated.
As she spoke, she felt she was personally responsible for starving the

dinosaurs; the old people looked gaunt and feeble to her—despite their size.

“Is the alternative just waiting and seeing?” Nurse Angela asked.
No one answered her.
“ ‘O Lord, support us all the day long, until the shadows lengthen and the

evening comes,’ ” Mrs. Grogan began softly, but Dr. Larch wouldn’t hear her
out.

“Whatever the alternative is—if there is one—it isn’t prayer,” he said.
“It’s always been an alternative for me,” Mrs. Grogan said defiantly.
“Then say it to yourself,” he said.
Dr. Larch moved slowly in the small room. He handed Nurse Angela the

letter to the board he had written for her. He handed Nurse Caroline her letter,
too.

“Just sign them,” he said. “Read them over, if you want.”
“You don’t know that Melony will expose you,” Mrs. Grogan said to him.
“Does it really matter?” Larch asked. “Just look at me. Do I have a lot of

time?” They looked away. “I don’t want to leave it up to Melony. Or to old
age,” he added. “Or to ether,” he admitted, which caused Nurse Edna to cover
her face with her hands. “I prefer to take my chances with Homer Wells.”

to the board of trustees; Nurse Angela would include these in the envelope
with her letter. The board would understand that all the nurses, and Mrs.
Grogan, had discussed the matter together. Wilbur Larch would not need ether
to help him sleep—not that night.

was praying. Nurse Edna took a long walk through the apple orchard on the
hill. Even when they all pitched in for the harvest, it was hard to keep up with
the apples Homer had provided. Nurse Caroline, who (everyone agreed) was
the most alert, was assigned the task of familiarizing herself with the details
of the life and training of the zealous missionary Dr. Stone; if the board asked
questions—and surely they would—someone had to be ready with the right
answers. Despite her youth and her energy, Nurse Caroline was forced to take
Fuzzy’s history with her to her bed, where sleep overcame her before she got
to the part about the children’s diarrhea.

Nurse Angela was on duty. She gave the woman who was expecting an

abortion another sedative; she gave a woman who was expecting a baby a
glass of water; she tucked one of the smaller boys back into his bed—he must
have had a dream; he was completely on top of his covers and his feet were
on his pillow. Dr. Larch had been so tired that he had gone to bed without
kissing any of the boys, so Nurse Angela decided to do this for him—and,
perhaps, for herself. When she’d kissed the last boy, her back was hurting her
and she sat down on one of the unoccupied beds. She listened to the boys’
breathing; she tried to remember Homer Wells as a boy, to recall the particular
sound of his breathing; she tried to get a picture of the postures of his style of
sleep. It calmed her to think of him. Given old age, given ether, given Melony,
she, too, would prefer to take her chances with Homer Wells.

“Please come home, Homer,” Nurse Angela whispered. “Please come

home.”

It was one of the few times that Nurse Angela fell asleep when she was on

duty, and the first time, ever, that she fell asleep in the boys’ sleeping room.
The boys were astonished to discover her with them in the morning; she woke
up with the boys climbing on her, and she needed to busy herself to assure the
younger ones that no great change in the order of their lives was being
heralded by her being found asleep among them. She hoped she was telling
the truth. A particularly small and superstitious boy did not believe her; he
believed in things he referred to as “woods creatures,” which he refused to
describe, and he remained convinced that one of these demons had turned
Nurse Angela into an orphan overnight.

“When you fall asleep, the bark grows over your eyes,” he explained to her.
“Heavens, no!” she said.

“Yes,” he said. “And then only the trees will adopt you.”
“Nonsense,” Nurse Angela told him. “The trees are just trees. And bark

can’t hurt you.”

be orphans.”

lap.

Larch had more to say. The little boy in her lap was trembling; he was
listening to the typewriter, too.

“Do you hear that?” he whispered to Nurse Angela.
“The typewriter?” she asked him.
“The what?” he said.
“That’s a typewriter,” she said, but he shook his head.
“No, it’s the bark,” he said. “It gets in at night, and in the morning.”
Although her back still hurt her, Nurse Angela carried the boy all the way to

her office; she showed him the noise he’d heard—Dr. Larch at the typewriter
—but she wondered if Larch, in the state he was in when he was writing, was
not even more terrifying to the little boy than his imagined tree people.

“You see?” Nurse Angela asked the boy. “It’s a typewriter, and that’s Doctor

Larch.” Larch scowled at them; irritated by the interruption, he grumbled
something they couldn’t hear. “You know Doctor Larch, don’t you?” Nurse
Angela asked the little boy.

then, tentatively, he let go with one hand, with which he pointed at the
typewriter and at Dr. Larch. “Woods creature,” he whispered.

This time the letter was written in Larch’s most didactic voice; he wrote to
Homer Wells; he told Homer everything. He didn’t beg. He did not
characterize Fuzzy Stone as having an altogether more important job than
Homer had; he did not point out that both Homer Wells and Fuzzy Stone were
impostors. Larch said that he was sure Angel would accept his father’s
sacrifice—“He’ll value your need to be of use,” was how Wilbur Larch put it.

“Young people find risk-taking admirable. They find it heroic,” Larch

argued. “If abortions were legal, you could refuse—in fact, given your beliefs,
you should refuse. But as long as they’re against the law, how can you refuse?
How can you allow yourself a choice in the matter when there are so many
women who haven’t the freedom to make the choice themselves? The women
have no choice. I know you know that’s not right, but how can you—you of
all people, knowing what you know—HOW CAN YOU FEEL FREE TO

CHOOSE NOT TO HELP PEOPLE WHO ARE NOT FREE TO GET
OTHER HELP? You have to help them because you know how. Think about
who’s going to help them if you refuse.” Wilbur Larch was so tired that if he
had allowed himself to go to sleep, the bark would have grown over his eyes.

trap—I haven’t trapped you. Because abortions are illegal, women who need
and want them have no choice in the matter, and you—because you know
how to perform them—have no choice, either. What has been violated here is
your freedom of choice, and every woman’s freedom of choice, too. If
abortion was legal, a woman would have a choice—and so would you. You
could feel free not to do it because someone else would. But the way it is,
you’re trapped. Women are trapped. Women are victims, and so are you.

has just been a job. I don’t know if you’ve got a work of art in you,” Larch
concluded in his letter to Homer, “but I know what your job is, and you know
what it is, too. You’re the doctor.”

It went out in the same mail with the letters and the “evidence” to the board

of trustees; Nurse Caroline not only carried the letters to the railroad station,
she also watched the mail being put on the train. When the train left, she
observed a particularly lost-looking young woman who’d gotten off the train
on the wrong side of the tracks; the station-master, who was watching
television, was not available to give directions. Nurse Caroline asked the
woozy young woman if she was looking for the orphanage, which she was.
Unable to speak, or else choosing not to, she simply nodded and accompanied
Nurse Caroline up the hill.

Dr. Larch was just finishing with the abortion patient who’d arrived the day

before and had spent the night. “I’m sorry you had to wait. I hope you were
comfortable,” he told her.

“Yes, everyone’s been very nice,” she said. “Even the children seem nice—

what I saw of them.” Dr. Larch was puzzled by the “even”; why wouldn’t the
children seem nice? Then he wondered if he had any idea how everything at
St. Cloud’s might appear to others.

He was on his way to the dispensary to rest for a while when Nurse Caroline

introduced him to the next patient. The young woman still wouldn’t speak,
which made it hard for Larch to trust her.

Larch guessed. The woman shook her head; she held up three fingers. “Third
month,” Larch said, but the woman shrugged; she held up four fingers.
“Maybe four?” Larch asked. She held up five fingers. “You’re five months
pregnant?” Larch asked. Now she held up six fingers. “Maybe six?” Larch

asked. The woman shrugged.

have no idea how long you’ve been pregnant?” Larch asked her, while Nurse
Caroline helped the woman undress; she was so undernourished, both Larch
and Nurse Caroline saw instantly that she was more pregnant than they first
supposed. After Larch examined the woman, who was extremely jumpy to his
touch, and feverish, he said, “You might be seven months. You might be too
late,” Larch pointed out to her. The woman shook her head.

getting the woman to assume the proper position. And while Nurse Caroline
took the woman’s temperature, all Larch could do was press his hand against
the woman’s abdomen, which was extremely tense—whenever Larch barely
touched her, she would hold her breath.

“Have you hurt yourself?” The woman froze. “Why won’t you talk?” Larch
asked; the woman shook her head. “Are you mute?” She shook her head.
“Have you been injured?” Larch asked. The woman shrugged.

going to look inside you, now,” Larch explained. “This is a speculum,” he
said, holding up the instrument. “It may feel cold, but it doesn’t hurt.” The
woman shook her head. “No, really, I’m not going to hurt you—I’m just
going to look.”

Larch.

“This will be more comfortable for you if you can relax,” Larch said; he

could feel the woman’s resistance to the speculum. As he bent to look, the
young woman spoke to him.

“It wasn’t me,” she said. “I would never have put all that inside of me.”
“All that?” Larch said. “All what?” Suddenly, he didn’t want to look before

he knew.

“It wasn’t me,” she repeated. “I would never do such a thing.”
Dr. Larch bent so close to the speculum, he had to hold his breath. The smell

of sepsis and putrefaction was strong enough to gag him if he breathed or
swallowed, and the familiar, fiery colors of her infection (even clouded by her
discharge) were dazzling enough to blind the intrepid or the untrained. But
Wilbur Larch started to breathe again, slowly and regularly; it was the only
way to keep a steady hand. He just kept looking and marveling at the young
woman’s inflamed tissue; it looked hot enough to burn the world. Now do you
see, Homer? Larch asked himself. Through the speculum, he felt her heat
against his eye.

Breaking the Rules

Melony, who had hitchhiked from Bath to Ocean View, hitchhiked back on
the same day; she’d lost her zeal for apple picking. She retreated, to plan
another vacation—or to plead to return to work. Melony went to the pizza bar
where everyone went, and she was looking so woebegone that Lorna left the
lout she was with at the bar and sat down in the booth opposite her.

“I guess you found him,” Lorna said.
“He’s changed,” Melony said; she told Lorna the story. “It wasn’t for me

that I felt so bad,” Melony said. “I mean, I didn’t really expect him to run
away with me, or anythin’ like that. It was just him—he was really better than
that, I thought. He was someone I thought was gonna be a hero. I guess that’s
dumb, but that’s what he looked like—like he had hero stuff in him. He
seemed so much better than everybody else, but he was just a fake.”

“You don’t know everythin’ that’s happened to him,” Lorna said

philosophically; she didn’t know Homer Wells, but she had sympathy for
sexual entanglements.

Her present sexual entanglement grew impatient at the bar, where he’d been

waiting for her; he was a bum named Bob, and he came over to Melony’s
booth where the two women were holding hands.

“I guess what’s the matter with Homer is that he’s a man,” Melony

observed. “I only ever met one who didn’t let his dong run his life”—she
meant Dr. Larch—“and he was an ether addict.”

“Are you with me, or have you gone back to her?” Bob asked Lorna, but he

stared at Melony.

“We was just talkin’, she was just bein’ an old friend,” Melony said.
“I thought you was on vacation,” Bob said to Melony. “Why don’tcha go

somewhere where there’s cannibals?”

“Go beat off in a bucket,” Melony told him. “Go try to fill a pail, go drip in

a teaspoon,” she told him, and Bob twisted her arm too sharply—he broke it.

Then Bob broke her nose against the Formica tabletop before some of the
shipyard workers pulled him off her.

arm and had set her nose—they set it almost straight—Lorna took Melony
back to the women-only boardinghouse, where they both agreed they
belonged: together. Lorna moved her things back in while Melony was
convalescing. The swelling in her face went down after a few days, and her
eyes turned from black to a purplish-green to yellow in about a week.

Lorna’s hand stroking her hair, “when he was a boy, he had that kind of
bravery that’s really special—no one could make him just go along with what
was goin’ on. And now look at him: bangin’ a cripple’s wife, lyin’ to his own
son.”

answer her, Lorna asked, “How come you’re not gonna press charges against
Bob?”

“Suppose it works?” Melony asked.
“Pardon me?” Lorna said.
“Suppose they really put Bob in jail, or send him off somewheres?” Melony

asked. “Then when I’m all better, I won’t be able to find him.”

“Oh,” Lorna said.

Homer Wells did not recognize the voice that spoke to him from the
headlights’ glare.

“What you got in the bag, Homer?” asked Mr. Rose. It had been a long drive

from the Carolinas, and Mr. Rose’s old car creaked and popped with heat and
with apparent pain. “It’s nice of you workin’ all night to make my house nice
for me, Homer,” he said. When he stepped in front of his headlights, his black
face was still hard to see, but Homer recognized the way he moved—so
slowly, but with a felt potential for moving so fast.

“Mister Rose!” Homer said.
“Mistuh Wells,” said Mr. Rose, smiling. They shook hands, while Homer’s

heart calmed down. Candy was still hiding in the cider house, and Mr. Rose
sensed that Homer wasn’t alone. He was peering through the lit kitchen,
looking into the shadowy bunkroom, when Candy walked, guiltily, into the
light.

“Missus Worthington!” said Mr. Rose.
“Mister Rose,” Candy said, smiling, shaking his hand. “We’re just in time,”

she said to Homer, poking him. “We just this minute got all the bed linen
ready,” she told Mr. Rose, but Mr. Rose observed that there was no car or

truck—that they had walked to the cider house. Had they carried all the
blankets and sheets?

“Just this minute, we got it all folded up, I mean,” Candy said.
Homer Wells thought that Mr. Rose might have seen the light in the apple-

mart office when he drove by. “We were working late in the office,” Homer
said, “and we remembered the linen was down here—all in a heap.”

Mr. Rose nodded and smiled. Then the baby cried. Candy jumped.
“I wrote to Wally ’bout bringin’ the daughter,” Mr. Rose explained, as a

young woman, about Angel’s age, walked into the light with a baby in her
arms.

“I haven’t seen you since you were a little girl,” Homer Wells told the young

woman, who looked at him blankly; it must have been an exhausting trip with
a small child.

“My daughter,” Mr. Rose said in introduction. “And her daughter,” he

added. “Missus Worthington,” said Mr. Rose, introducing her, “and Homer
Wells.”

“Candy,” Candy said, shaking the young woman’s hand.
“Homer,” Homer said. He couldn’t remember the daughter’s name, and so

he asked her. She looked a little startled, and looked at her father—as if for
clarification, or advice.

“Rose,” Mr. Rose said.
Everyone laughed—the daughter, too. The baby stopped crying and looked

with wonder at the laughter. “No, I mean your first name!” said Homer Wells.

“Rose is her first name,” said Mr. Rose. “You already heard it.”
“Rose Rose?” Candy asked. The daughter smiled; she didn’t look very sure.
“Rose Rose,” said Mr. Rose proudly.
Everyone laughed again; the baby was cheering up, and Candy played with

the little girl’s fingers. “And what’s her name?” Candy asked Rose Rose. This
time, the young woman answered for herself.

“She don’t have a name, yet,” Rose Rose replied.
“We’re still thinking it out,” said Mr. Rose.
“What a good idea,” said Homer Wells, who knew that too many names

were given frivolously, or just temporarily—or, in the cases of John Wilbur
and Wilbur Walsh, that they were repeated without imagination.

“The cider house isn’t really set up for a baby,” Candy said to Rose Rose.

“If you’d like to come up to the house, I may have some baby things you
could use—there’s even a playpen in the attic, isn’t there, Homer?”

“We don’t need nothin’,” Mr. Rose said pleasantly. “Maybe she’ll look

another day.”

“I could sleep a whole day, I think,” said Rose Rose prettily.

could sleep.”

smiling.

“Want a hand unpacking?” Homer asked him.
“Not today, anyway,” Mr. Rose said. “What’s in the bag, Homer?” he asked

when they’d all said good night and Homer and Candy were leaving.

“Apples,” Homer admitted.
“That would be strange,” said Mr. Rose. Homer unzipped the bag and

showed him the apples.

“You the apple doctor?” Mr. Rose asked him.
Homer almost said “Right.”
“He knows,” Homer said to Candy, as they were walking back to the office.
“Of course he knows,” Candy said. “But what’s it matter if we’re stopping?”
“I guess it doesn’t matter,” Homer said.
“Since you were prepared to tell Wally and Angel,” she said, “I guess it

won’t be that hard to really do it.”

apple mart and the office light, they dropped hands and walked their separate
ways.

“What’s the bag for?” Candy asked him, before she kissed him good night.
“It’s for me,” said Homer Wells. “I think it’s for me.”
He fell asleep, marveling at what seemed to him to be the extreme control

Mr. Rose had of his world—he even controlled the speed at which his
daughter’s daughter would be named (not to mention, probably, the name
itself)! Homer woke up near dawn and took a fountain pen from his night
table and used it to write, with a heavy finality, over the penciled number on
the back of the photograph of the crew of Opportunity Knocks.

With the dark ink he followed the outline of the pencil; this permanency was
reassuring—as if ink, as on a contract, was more binding than pencil. He
couldn’t have known that Candy was also awake; her stomach was upset, and
she was looking for some medicine in her and Wally’s bathroom. She also
found it necessary to address the subject of the two hundred seventy times she
and Homer had made love together since Wally had come home from the war,
but Candy honored the finality of this number with less significance than
Homer honored it. Instead of writing over the number in ink, Candy used her
eraser to remove the evidence from the back of the photograph of her teaching
Homer how to swim. Then her stomach calmed and she was able to sleep. It
astonished her: how completely relaxed she was at the prospect that after the

harvest, her life (as she’d grown used to it) would be over.

subject of sleep; he knew there was no fighting history. He read an article in
The New England Journal of Medicine about antibiotic therapy; he’d
followed, for many years, the uses of penicillin and streptomycin. He was less
familiar with Aureomycin and Terramycin, but he thought that antibiotics
were easy to figure out. He read about the limited usage of neomycin; he
made note of the fact that Achromycin and tetracycline were the same. He
wrote erythromycin in the margin of the article, several times, until he was
sure he knew how to spell it; Dr. Larch had taught him that method of
familiarizing himself with something new.

“E-R-Y-T-H-R-O-M-Y-C-I-N,” wrote Homer Wells—the apple doctor, as

Mr. Rose had called him. He wrote that in the margin, too. “The apple
doctor.” And just before he got out of bed, he wrote, “A Bedouin Again.”

needed anything for the baby, and that was when Angel fell in love. He was
shy with girls his own age; boys his own age, and a little older, always teased
him about his name. He thought he was the only Angel in Maine. He was
even shy in advance of meeting girls, anticipating when he would have to tell
them his name. In Heart’s Rock and Heart’s Haven, the prettier, more
confident girls in his class ignored him; they were interested in the older boys.
The girls who appeared to like him were plain, sullen gossips who most
enjoyed talking to other girls like themselves, about themselves—or about
which boys had said what to whom. Every time Angel spoke to a girl, he
knew his remarks were relayed that evening over the telephone to every other
neglected girl in his class. The following morning, they would all smirk at
him—as if he’d said the same, foolish thing to each of them. And so he
learned to keep quiet. He watched the older girls in school; he approved of the
ones who did the least amount of talking to their girlfriends. They struck him
as more mature, by which he meant that they were actually doing things they
would not want their girlfriends to know.

in other times—looked forward to doing things.

ever seen; if she had a daughter, she must also have done things.

It was cold and damp in the cider house in the mornings; when Angel

arrived there, Rose Rose was outside, in the sun, washing Baby Rose in a
bucket. The baby was splashing, and Rose Rose was talking to her daughter;
she didn’t hear Angel walking up to her. Perhaps—since Angel had been
brought up more by his father than by his mother—Angel was predisposed to

be attracted to a Madonna scene. Rose Rose was only a few years older than
Angel—she was so young that her maternity was startling. When she was
with her baby, her gestures and her expressions were womanly, and she had a
full, womanly figure. She was a little taller than Angel. She had a round,
boyish face.

wrapped her daughter in a towel and stood up.

the flange of one nostril and her upper lip; it made a nick in her gum, which
Angel could see when she parted her lips. Later, he would see that the knife
had stopped at the eyetooth and removed it, which accounted for her only
partial smile. She would explain to him that the wound had killed the root of
the tooth and that the tooth had fallen out later. He was so smitten when he
first met her that even the scar was beautiful to him; it was her only apparent
flaw.

“I wondered if I could help you get anything for the baby,” Angel said.
“She seem to be teethin’,” Rose Rose reported on her daughter. “She kind of

cranky today.”

smiled, and then he walked over and put his arm around the boy. “How you
doin’?” he asked. “You still growin’, I think. I used to carry him on top of my
head,” he told Rose Rose. “He used to grab them apples I couldn’t reach,” Mr.
Rose explained, punching Angel affectionately on the arm.

“I’m counting on growing a little more,” Angel said—for Rose Rose’s

benefit. He wouldn’t want her to think he had stopped growing; he wanted her
to know that he would be taller than she, one day.

somehow more grown-up to wear a shirt. Then he imagined that she might
approve of his summer tan, and so he relaxed about not having a shirt; he put
his hands in the hip pockets of his jeans, and he wished he’d worn his
baseball cap. It was a Boston Red Sox cap, and he had to get hold of it first
thing in the morning if he was going to wear it—otherwise, Candy would
wear it. They had been meaning to buy another baseball cap for two summers
now; Candy owed him one because she’d admitted to tearing one of the sweat
holes in the cap by poking a pencil through it.

This would be the second harvest that Angel would be a checker, and the
second summer that he got to drive one of the tractors that hauled the apples
out of the orchards.

When Angel told his father that Rose Rose’s baby was teething, Homer

knew what to do. He sent Angel (with Wally) to town to buy some pacifiers,
and then he sent Angel back to the cider house with a package of pacifiers and
a fifth of bourbon; Wally drank a very little bourbon from time to time, and
the bottle was three-quarters full. Homer showed Angel how to dab whiskey
on Baby Rose’s gums.

“It numbs the gums,” Angel explained to Rose Rose. He dipped his pinky

finger in the whiskey, then he stuck his finger in Baby Rose’s tiny mouth. At
first, he was afraid he’d gag the baby girl, whose eyes instantly grew large
and watery at the bourbon fumes; but then Baby Rose went to work on
Angel’s finger so ferociously that when he removed his finger to apply more
bourbon, the baby cried to have the finger back.

“You gonna make her drunk,” Rose Rose warned.
“No, I won’t,” Angel assured her. “I’m just putting her gums to sleep.”
Rose Rose examined the pacifiers. They were rubber nipples, like the nipple

on a baby’s bottle, but without the hole and attached to a baby-blue plastic
ring that was too big to swallow. The problem with using a regular bottle
nipple, Angel Wells explained, was that the baby would keep sucking in air
through the hole, and the air would give the baby burping fits or a gassy
stomach.

“How come you know so much?” Rose Rose asked Angel, smiling. “How

old are you?”

“I’m almost sixteen,” Angel said. “How old are you?”
“ ’Bout your age,” she told him.
In the afternoon, when Angel came back to the cider house to see how the

teething was going, Baby Rose was not the only Rose with a pacifier stuck in
her mouth. Mr. Rose was sitting on the cider house roof, and Angel could see
—from a considerable distance, because of the unreal, baby-blue hue of the
plastic ring—that he had a pacifier in his mouth.

“Are you teething, too?” Angel called up to him. Mr. Rose removed the

pacifier from his mouth slowly—the way he did everything.

all day, who needs a cigarette?” He stuck the pacifier back in his mouth and
grinned at Angel broadly.

In the cider house, Baby Rose had fallen asleep with a pacifier in her mouth

and Angel surprised Rose Rose as she was washing her hair. She was bent
over the kitchen sink with her back to him; he couldn’t see her breasts,
although she was bare from the waist up.

“Is that you?” she asked ambiguously, keeping her back turned to him—but

not jumping to cover herself.

she jumped and covered herself, her hair still soapy; she must have thought it
was her father.

“I was checking on how the teething was going,” Angel explained.
“It goin’ fine,” Rose Rose said. “You a good doctor. You my hero, for

today.” She was smiling her partial smile.

A stream of bright suds from the shampoo ran around her neck and down

her chest, over her arms, which she’d folded, with a towel, across her unseen
breasts. Angel Wells, smiling, backed so far away from the cider house door
that he bumped into the old car, which was parked close enough against the
cider house to appear to be helping hold the building up. He heard a tiny
pebble come rolling down the cider house roof, but when it hit him on the
head—even though he’d had time to steal the baseball cap away from Candy
and now wore it at a casual angle, with the visor shading his forehead—the
pebble hurt. He looked up at Mr. Rose, who had rolled the pebble in his
direction—a perfect shot.

“Gotcha!” Mr. Rose said, smiling.
But it was Rose Rose who’d really gotten him; Angel staggered back to the

apple mart and into the fancy house as if he’d been struck by a boulder.

Who was the baby’s father? Angel Wells wondered. And where was he?

And where was Mrs. Rose? Were Mr. Rose and his daughter all alone?

He took some names he liked out of the dictionary, and then he added other
names that the dictionary had overlooked. How else do you impress a girl
who hasn’t been able to think of a name for her baby?

Angel would have been a blessing to St. Cloud’s, where the practice of

naming the babies was a little worn out. Although Nurse Caroline had
contributed her youthful energy to the nearly constant occasion, her rather
political choices had been met with some resistance. She was fond of Karl
(for Marx), and Eugene (for Debs), but everyone balked at Friedrich (for
Engels), and so she had been reduced to Fred (which she didn’t like). Nurse
Angela also complained about Norman (for Thomas)—to her it was a name
like Wilbur. But it was difficult to know if Angel Wells could have kept his
passion for names intact when the task was almost a daily business. Finding a
name for Rose Rose’s daughter was a devotion quite unexpected—yet it was
typical of a boy’s first love.

Abby? thought Angel Wells. Alberta? Alexandra? Amanda? Amelia?

Antoinette? Audrey? Aurora? “Aurora Rose,” Angel said aloud. “God, no,”
he said, plunging into the alphabet. The scar on the face of the young woman
he loved was so extremely thin, so very fine—Angel imagined that if he could
kiss that scar, he could make it disappear; and he began working his way

through the B’s.

Bathsheba? Beatrice? Bernice? Bianca? Blanche? Bridget?

Dr. Larch was facing a different problem. The dead patient had come to St.
Cloud’s without a scrap of identification—she’d brought only her burning
infection, her overpowering discharge, her dead but unexpelled fetus (and
several of the instruments she—or someone else—had put into herself in
order to expel the fetus), her punctured uterus, her unstoppable fever, her
acute peritonitis. She reached Dr. Larch too late for him to save her, yet Larch
blamed himself.

“She was alive when she got here,” Larch told Nurse Caroline. “I’m

supposed to be a doctor.”

“Then be one,” Nurse Caroline said, “and stop being maudlin.”
“I’m too old,” Larch said. “Someone younger, someone quicker, might have

saved her.”

“If that’s what you think, maybe you are too old,” Nurse Caroline told him.

“You’re not seeing things as they are.”

“As they are,” said Wilbur Larch, who closed himself off in the dispensary.

He’d never been good about losing patients, but this one, Nurse Caroline
knew, was quite lost when she’d arrived.

“If he can hold himself responsible for a case like that,” Nurse Caroline told

Nurse Angela, “then I think he ought to be replaced—he is too old.”

Nurse Angela agreed. “It’s not that he’s incompetent, but once he starts

thinking he’s incompetent, he’s had it.”

Nurse Edna would not contribute to this conversation. She went and stood

outside the dispensary door, where she repeated, and repeated, “You’re not
too old, you’re not incompetent, you’re not too old,” but Wilbur Larch could
not hear her; he was under ether, and he was traveling. He was far away, in
Burma—which he saw almost as clearly as Wally ever saw it, although Larch
(even with ether’s assistance) could never have imagined such heat. The
shade that he saw under the peepul trees was deceiving; it was not really cool
there—not at that time of the day that the Burmese refer to as “when feet are
silent.” Larch was observing the missionary Dr. Stone making his rounds.
Even the noonday heat would not keep Fuzzy Stone from saving the
diarrhetic children.

Wally could have informed Larch’s dream with some better detail. How

slippery the bamboo leaves were when one was trying to walk uphill—for
example. How the sleeping mats were always damp with sweat; how it
seemed (to Wally) to be a country of submagistrates, corrupted by the British
—either into being like the British, or into being consumed by their hatred of

the British. Wally had once been carried across a plateau shot through with
sprouting weeds and befouled with pigshit; on it was a former tennis court,
built by someone British. The net was now a magistrate’s hammock. The
court itself, because of the high fence that enclosed it, was a good place to
keep the pigs; the fence, which had once kept tennis balls from being lost in
the jungle, now made it more difficult for the leopards to kill the pigs. At that
way station, Wally would remember, the magistrate himself had instrumented
his urinary tract for him; a kindly, round-faced man with patient, steady
hands, he had used a long, silver swizzle stick—something else the British
had left behind. Although the magistrate’s English was poor, Wally had made
him understand what the swizzle stick was for.

“British ees crazy,” the Burmese gentleman had said to Wally. “Yes?”
“Yes, I think so,” Wally had agreed. He hadn’t known many British, but

some of them seemed crazy to him, and so it seemed a small thing to agree to
—and Wally thought it was wise to agree with whoever it was who held the
catheter.

of the thing was adorned with a kind of heraldic shield, Queen Victoria’s stern
face presiding (in this one case, she was observing a use of the instrument she
adorned that might have shocked her).

magistrate said, chuckling. He lubricated the catheter with his own saliva.

Through his tears, Wally tried to laugh.
And in the rounds that Dr. Stone was making, wouldn’t many of the

diarrhetic children suffer urinary retention, wouldn’t Dr. Stone have to relieve
their little, distended bladders, and wouldn’t his catheter be proper and his
method of instrumentation sound? In Wilbur Larch’s eyes, which were over
Burma, Dr. Stone would be perfect—Fuzzy Stone wouldn’t lose a single
patient.

without a name would not sit well alongside the recent “evidence” submitted
to the board of trustees, knew it was time for her to write to Homer Wells.
While Dr. Larch rested in the dispensary, Nurse Caroline worked with a
vengeance over the typewriter in Nurse Angela’s office.

were always telling me to leave Cape Kenneth, that my services were more
needed here—and you were right. And do you think your services aren’t
needed here, or that they aren’t needed right now? Do you think the apples
can’t grow without you? Just who do you think the board’s going to replace
him with if you don’t step forward? One of the usual cowards who does what

he’s told, one of your typically careful, mousy, medical men—a little law-
abiding citizen who will be of absolutely NO USE!”

there was a body at the orphanage; various authorities would have to be sent
for. It had been a long time since the stationmaster had seen bodies at the
orphanage, but he would never forget the bodies he had seen—not his
predecessor, after the sternum shears had opened him up, and certainly never
the fetal autopsy from Three Mile Falls.

where the constant television revealed to him its blurry, fade-in and fade-out
images—any one of which the stationmaster found preferable to the more
vivid picture of those long-ago bodies.

butchered herself, trying to get the baby out. She got to us too late for us to be
able to do anything about it.”

on the TV screen, the stationmaster clung to the table as if it were an altar and
the television was his god—at least, he knew, he would never see on that
television anything resembling what Nurse Caroline described, and so the
stationmaster continued to watch the TV instead of looking into Nurse
Caroline’s eyes.

Carmen? Cecelia? Charity? Claudia? Constance? Cookie? Cordelia? Angel
Wells cocked the Red Sox cap at the correct angle; although it was cool in the
early morning, he elected not to wear a shirt. Dagmar? he thought. Daisy?
Dolores? Dotty?

“Where are you going in my hat?” Candy asked him; she was picking up the

breakfast dishes.

“It’s my hat,” Angel said, going out the door.
“Love is blind,” Wally said, pushing his wheelchair away from the table.
Does he mean me or Angel? Candy wondered. Homer and Wally were

worried about Angel’s puppylike infatuation with Rose Rose, but that is all it
seemed to Candy: puppylike. Candy knew that Rose Rose had too much
experience to allow Angel to get carried away. That wasn’t the point, Homer
had said. Candy imagined that Rose Rose had more experience in her little
finger than . . . but that wasn’t the point, either, Wally had said.

“Well, I hope the point isn’t that she’s colored,” Candy had said.
“The point is Mister Rose,” Wally had said. The word “Right!” had been

almost visible on Homer’s lips. Men want to control everything, Candy
thought.

him from Dr. Larch, but Homer didn’t look through the mail. That was
Wally’s job; besides, the picking crew had arrived. The harvest would be
starting as soon as Homer could get it organized. He looked out the office
window and saw his son not wearing any shirt and talking to Big Dot Taft. He
opened the screen door and hollered at Angel. “Hey, it’s cold this morning—
put on a shirt!” Angel was already walking toward the barns beyond the apple
mart.

“I got to warm up the tractor!” he told his father.
“Warm yourself up first!” Homer told him, but the boy was already very

warm this morning.

Edith? Angel asked himself. Ernestine? Esmeralda? Eve! he thought.
He bumped into Vernon Lynch, who was glowering over a cup of hot coffee.
“Watch where yer goin’,” Vernon told Angel.
“Faith!” Angel said to him. “Felicia! Francesca! Frederica!”
“Asshole,” said Vernon Lynch.
“No, that’s you,” Big Dot Taft told him. “You’re the asshole, Vernon.”
“God, I love the harvest!” Wally said, cruising around the kitchen table,

while Candy washed the dishes. “It’s my favorite time.”

weeks to live.

Pan shopping. A man named Peaches had picked for them before, but not for
several years; he was called Peaches because his beard never grew. Also, a
man named Muddy was back; no one had seen Muddy for years. He’d been
badly knifed at the cider house one night, and Homer had driven him to the
hospital in Cape Kenneth. Muddy had taken one hundred twenty-three
stitches; Homer Wells thought he’d looked like a kind of experimental
sausage.

Homer guessed it might have been the dominant rule of the cider house. No
hurting each other. You cut people to scare them, to show them who’s boss,
but you don’t send people to the hospital. Then the law comes, and everyone
at the cider house feels small. The man who’d cut Muddy hadn’t been
thinking about the community.

“He was really tryin’ to cut my ass off, man,” Muddy had said, as if he were

surprised.

“He was an amateur,” Mr. Rose had said. “He long gone now, anyway.”
The rest of the crew, except for Mr. Rose’s daughter, hadn’t been to Ocean

View before. Mr. Rose arranged, with Angel, how Rose Rose and her

daughter would spend the day.

“She can sit on the fender, or stand behind the seat. She can ride on the trailer,
before it full.”

“Sure!” Angel said.
“If she need to take the baby back to the cider house, she can walk,” Mr.

Rose said. “She don’t need no special favors.”

his daughter when she was standing beside him, looking a little embarrassed.
Baby Rose—pacifier in place—rode her hip.

Rose nodded.

“Candy said she’d look after her, too,” Angel offered.
“No need botherin’ Missus Worthington,” said Mr. Rose, and Rose Rose

shook her head.

cushion on the seat (and he thought a cushion was for an old man with piles),
he couldn’t quite see the radiator cap. He was afraid that, if he sat down, the
engine might overheat and the radiator would boil over without his noticing it.
But most of all, it looked better to drive a tractor standing up.

He was glad he was driving the International Harvester; years ago,

Raymond Kendall had built a swivel for the seat. He could let Rose Rose sit
down—with or without Baby Rose in her lap—and he could stand a little to
one side of the swivel seat and operate the tractor without awkwardness.
There was a foot clutch, a foot brake, and a hand throttle. The emergency
hand brake was next to Rose Rose’s hip; the gearshift was by her knee.

but nobody see ’em. You got nice hair, but nobody see it. And you got one
pale forehead ’cause the sun can’t find your face. If you didn’t wear that
dumb cap, your face would be as brown as your body.”

This implied to Angel, of course, that Rose Rose liked his body being

brown, didn’t care for his forehead being pale, and had managed—despite the
hat—to notice his eyes and hair (and to like them, too).

After filling the trailer with his first load of apples, Angel took a long drink

from a water jug in the orchard, twisting the baseball cap backward on his
head as he drank. Then he wore it that way, the way a catcher wears a
baseball cap—or the way Candy wore it, with the visor tipped over her hair
and the back of her neck. Somehow it looked better that way on Candy. When
Rose Rose saw Angel wearing the cap that way, she said, “Now you look real
stupid, like you got a ball for a head.”

The next day, Angel let Candy wear the cap.
Baby Rose was sucking the pacifier, like a three-horsepower pump, and

Rose Rose smiled at Angel. “Where’s that nice hat?” she asked him.

“I lost it,” he lied.
“Too bad,” she said. “It was nice.”
“I thought you didn’t like that hat,” he said.
“I didn’t like that hat on you,” said Rose Rose.
The next day he brought the hat and put it on her head as soon as she was

settled into the tractor seat. Rose Rose looked awfully pleased; she wore the
hat the same way Angel had worn it—low, over her eyes. Baby Rose looked
cross-eyed at the visor.

“You lost it and then you found it, huh?” Rose Rose asked Angel.
“Right,” Angel said.
“You better be careful,” she told him. “You don’t wanna get involved with

me.”

—especially since he was unsure how to express his interest.

“How old are you?” he asked her casually, later that day.
“ ’Bout your age, Angel,” was all she said. Baby Rose slumped against her

breast; a floppy-brimmed white sailor’s hat protected the baby from the sun,
but under the brim of the hat, the little girl looked glassy-eyed and exhausted
from chomping on the pacifier all day. “I don’t believe you can still be
teethin’,” Rose Rose said to her daughter. She took hold of the baby-blue
plastic ring and pulled the pacifier out of the little girl’s mouth; it made a pop
like a wine cork, which startled Baby Rose. “You becomin’ an addict,” Rose
Rose said, but when Baby Rose started to cry, her mother put the nipple back.

“How do you like the name Gabriella?” Angel asked Rose Rose.
“I never heard it before,” she said.
“How about Ginger?” Angel asked.
“That somethin’ you eat,” Rose Rose said.
“Gloria?” Angel asked.
“That nice,” said Rose Rose. “Who it for?”
“Your baby!” Angel said. “I’ve been thinking of names for your baby.” Rose

Rose raised the visor of the Boston Red Sox cap and looked into Angel’s
eyes.

“Why you thinkin’ of that?” she asked him.
“Just to be of help,” he said awkwardly. “Just to help you decide.”
“Decide?” Rose Rose asked.
“To help you make up your mind,” said Angel Wells.
The picker named Peaches was almost as fast as Mr. Rose. He was emptying

his canvas bag into a bushel crate, and he interrupted Rose Rose and Angel.

“You countin’ me, Angel?” Peaches asked.
“I got you,” Angel said. Sometimes Angel examined the fruit if he didn’t

know the picker very well—to make sure they weren’t bruising it; if they
were bruising it, or if there were other signs that they were picking too fast,
Angel wouldn’t give them the top price for a bushel. But Angel knew Peaches
was a good picker, so he just put a number on the list without getting off the
tractor to look at the apples.

“Ain’t you a checker?” Peaches asked Angel, then.
“Sure, I got you!” Angel said to him.
“Don’t you wanna check me, then? Better make sure I ain’t pickin’ pears, or

somethin’,” Peaches said, grinning. Angel went to look over the apples, and
that was when Peaches said to him: “You don’t wanna go into the knife
business with Mistuh Rose.” Then he walked away, with his bag and his
ladder, before Angel could say anything about his apples—which were, of
course, perfect.

baby’s father?” he asked Rose Rose.

“Wasn’t ever married,” she said.
“Are you still together, you and the father?” Angel asked.
“Baby got no father,” Rose Rose said. “I wasn’t ever together.”
“I like Hazel and Heather,” Angel said, after a while. “They’re both names

of plants, so they sort of go with Rose.”

“I don’t have no plant, I got a little girl,” Rose Rose said, smiling.
“I also like the name Hope,” Angel said.
“Hope ain’t no name,” Rose Rose said.
“Iris is nice,” Angel said. “But it’s sort of cute, because it’s another flower.

Then there’s Isadora.”

“Whew!” said Rose Rose. “No name is better than some.”
“Well, how about plain old Jane?” asked Angel Wells, who was getting

frustrated. “Jennifer? Jessica? Jewel? Jill? Joyce? Julia? Justine?”

to jackknife the trailer and spill the load. “Don’t never stop,” she told him. “I
never knew there was so many names. Go on,” she said, her hand urging him
—it was just a little shove, before she returned her hand to her lap, where
Baby Rose sat mesmerized by the tractor’s motion and the tractor’s sound.

“Katherine? Kathleen? Kirsten? Kitty?” Angel Wells began.
“Go on,” Rose Rose said, her hand grazing his hip again.
“Laura? Laurie? Laverne? Lavinia? Leah? That means ‘weary,’ ” he told

her. “Malvina? That means ‘smooth snow,’ ” he explained.

“I never livin’ where they got snow,” Rose Rose said.
“Maria?” Angel said. “Marigold? That’s another flower. Mavis? That means

a ‘thrush,’ it’s a kind of bird,” he said.

“Don’t tell me what they mean,” Rose Rose instructed him.
“Melissa? Mercedes?” Angel said.
“Ain’t that a car?” Rose Rose asked him.
“It’s a good car,” Angel said. “A German car. Very expensive.”
“I seen one, I think,” Rose Rose said. “They got a funny bull’s-eye on the

hood.”

“Their insignia,” said Angel Wells.
“Their what?” she asked.
“It’s a kind of bull’s-eye, you’re right,” Angel said.
“Say it again,” Rose Rose said.
“Mercedes,” he said.
“It for rich people, ain’t it?” Rose Rose asked.
“The car?” he asked.
“The name or the car,” she said.
“Well,” Angel said, “it’s an expensive car, but the name means ‘Our Lady of

Mercies.’ ”

“Well, fuck it, then,” Rose Rose said. “Didn’t I tell you not to tell me what

the names mean?”

“Sorry,” he said.
“How come you never wear a shirt?” she asked him. “Ain’t you never

cold?”

Angel shrugged.
“You can go on with them names, any time,” she told him.
After the first four or five days of the harvest, the wind shifted; there was a

strong sea breeze off the Atlantic, and the early mornings were especially
cold. Angel wore a T-shirt and a sweat shirt over that. One morning, when it
was so cold that Rose Rose had left Baby Rose with Candy, Angel saw that
she was shivering and he gave her his sweat shirt. She wore it all day. She
was still wearing it when Angel went to help with the cider press that night,
and for a while they sat on the cider house roof together. Black Pan sat up
there with them, and he told them about the time when there’d been an Army
installation on the coast, which they could see at night.

Angel, “he made up a name for it—he had us all shittin’ our pants, we was so
scared. It was a kind of wheel, he told us—it sent people to the moon, or
somethin’.”

“It was a Ferris wheel,” said Mr. Rose in the darkness. “It was just a Ferris

wheel.”

“Yeah, that what it was!” Black Pan said. “I seen one, once.”
“But it was somethin’ else that used to be out there,” Mr. Rose said

dreamily. “It got used in the war.”

“Yeah,” Black Pan said. “They shot it at somebody.”
Watching the lights on the coast, Rose Rose announced: “I’m movin’ to the

city.”

“Maybe, when you old enough,” said Mr. Rose.
“Maybe Atlanta,” she said. “I been in Atlanta,” she told Angel—“at night,

too.”

other time.”

“You said it was Atlanta,” she told him.
“Maybe I said it was Atlanta,” said Mr. Rose, “but it was Charleston.” Black

Pan laughed.

was still cold, she was wearing one of Mr. Rose’s old sweaters and she
handed the sweat shirt back to Angel.

“Got my own clothes, sort of, this mornin’,” she told Angel, the baseball cap

pulled lower than usual over her eyes. Black Pan was watching after Baby
Rose, and it took Angel a while to see that Rose Rose had a black eye—a
white person doesn’t spot a black eye on a black person right away, but she
had a good one.

“He say it okay if I wear your hat, but for you to wear your own shirt,” Rose

Rose told Angel. “I told you,” she said. “You don’t wanna get involved with
me.”

with Mr. Rose. Angel told Mr. Rose that he meant nothing improper by letting
Rose Rose wear his sweat shirt; Angel added that he really liked Mr. Rose’s
daughter, and so forth. Angel got pretty worked up about it, although Mr.
Rose remained a calm, calm man. Of course, Angel (and all the rest of them)
had seen Mr. Rose peel and core an apple in about three or four seconds—it
was widely presumed that Mr. Rose could bleed a man in half a minute. He
could have made the whole mess of a human being look like a series of slight
shaving injuries.

Rose had told Angel, of course, but now Angel saw the trap; he was only
making trouble for her. Mr. Rose would never allow himself to have any
trouble with Angel. Mr. Rose knew the rules: they were the real cider house

rules, they were the pickers’ rules.

“I just thought you had hit her,” Angel said, backing off.
“Not me,” said Mr. Rose.
Before he put the tractor away, Angel spoke with Rose Rose. He told her

that if she was frightened about staying in the cider house, she could always
stay with him—that he had an extra bed in his room, or that he could vacate
his room and make it into a guest room for her and her baby.

nicest man she ever knew. She had such a languid manner, like someone who
was used to sleeping while standing up—her heavy limbs as relaxed as if she
were underwater. She had a lazy body, yet in her presence Angel felt the same
potential for lightning-quick movement that surrounded her father as
intimately as someone’s scent. Rose Rose gave Angel the shivers.

Rose?”

“I’m more curious how you’re getting along with Rose Rose,” Candy said.
“How he’s getting along with the girl is his own business,” Wally said.
“Right,” said Homer Wells, and Wally let it pass.
“How you’re getting along with Mister Rose is our business, Angel,” Wally

said.

“Because we love you,” Homer said.
“Mister Rose won’t hurt me,” Angel told them.
“Of course he won’t!” Candy said.
“Mister Rose does what he wants,” Wally said.
“He’s got his own rules,” said Homer Wells.
“He beats his daughter,” Angel told them. “He hit her once, anyway.”
“Don’t make that your business, Angel,” Wally told the boy.
“That’s right,” Homer said.
“I’ll make it my business!” Candy told them. “If he’s beating that girl, he’ll

hear about it from me.”

“No, he won’t,” Wally said.
“Better not,” Homer told her.
“Don’t tell me what to do,” she told them, and they were quiet; they both

knew better than to try to tell Candy what to do.

“Are you sure it’s true, Angel?” Candy asked.
“Almost sure,” the boy said. “Ninety-nine percent.”
“Make it a hundred percent, Angel, before you say it’s true,” his father told

him.

“Right,” Angel said as he got up from the table and cleared his dishes.
“Good thing we got all that straightened out,” Wally said when Angel was in

the kitchen. “Good thing we’re all such experts at the truth,” he said as Candy
got up from the table to clear her dishes. Homer Wells kept sitting where he
was.

—that she’d picked citrus in Florida and peaches in Georgia, and she’d driven
up the East Coast all the way to Maine, but she’d never stuck so much as her
toe in the Atlantic. She’d never even felt the sand.

“That’s crazy!” said Angel Wells. “We’ll go to the beach some Sunday.”
“What for?” she said. “You think I gonna look better with a tan? What

would I go to a beach for?”

“To swim!” Angel said. “The ocean! The salt water!”
“I don’t know how to swim,” Rose Rose informed him.
“Oh,” he said. “Well, you don’t have to swim to enjoy the ocean. You don’t

have to go in over your head.”

“I don’t have no bathin’ suit,” she said.
“Oh,” Angel said. “Well, I can get you one. I’ll bet one of Candy’s would fit

you.” Rose Rose looked only mildly surprised. Any bathing suit of Candy’s
would be a tight fit.

along with Black Pan, Angel drove her to the baby-tree orchard near Cock
Hill; they were not picking the baby trees, so there was no one there. You
could barely see the ocean. You could see the unnatural end of the horizon,
how the sky inexplicably flattened out—and by standing on the tractor, they
could distinguish the different tones of blue and gray where the sky bled into
the sea. Rose Rose remained unimpressed.

tugged her by one arm—just fooling around, just an affectionate gesture—but
she suddenly cried out; his hand grazed the small of her back as she turned
away from him, and when he looked at his hand, he saw her blood.

“It’s my period,” she lied. Even a fifteen-year-old boy knows that the blood

from anyone’s period isn’t usually found on the back.

ones on the backs of her legs, and not the ones on her rump; he had to take her
word for those. She showed him only the cuts on her back—they were fine,
thread-thin, razorlike cuts; they were extremely deliberate, very careful cuts
that would heal completely in a day or two. They were slightly deeper than
scratches; they were not intended to leave scars.

“I told you,” she said to Angel, but she still kissed him, hard. “You shouldn’t

have no business with me. I ain’t really available.”

would only make things worse—Rose Rose convinced him of that. And if
Angel wanted to take her to the beach—somehow, some Sunday, they should
both be as nice to Mr. Rose as they could manage.

three stitches, had said it the best. What he said once was, “If old Rose had
cut me, I wouldn’t of needed one stitch. I would of bled a pint an hour, or
even slower, and when it was finally all over it would have looked like
someone hadn’t used anythin’ on me except a stiff toothbrush.”

of Peaches who spoke to him. “You don’t wanna get involved with Rose
Rose, you know. The knife business ain’t your business, Angel,” Muddy said,
putting his arm around the boy and giving him a squeeze. Muddy liked Angel;
he remembered, fondly, how Angel’s father had gotten him to Cape Kenneth
Hospital in time.

cider house roof and told her all about the ocean: the strange tiredness one
feels at the edge of the sea, the weight in the air, the haze in the middle of a
summer day, the way the surf softens sharp things. He told her the whole,
familiar story. How we love to love things for other people; how we love to
have other people love things through our eyes.

Rose’s wrongdoing. He told the whole story to his father, and to Candy and
Wally.

“He cut her? He deliberately cut her?” Wally asked Angel.
“No doubt about it,” Angel said. “I’m a hundred percent sure.”
“I can’t imagine how he could do that to his own daughter,” said Homer

Wells.

Rose is so in charge of everything,” Candy said, shivering. “We have to do
something about this.”

“We do?” Wally asked.
“Well, we can’t do nothing!” Candy told him.
“People do,” Wally said.
“If you speak to him, he’ll hurt her more,” Angel told them. “And she’ll

know I told you. I want your advice, I don’t want you to do anything.”

of speaking to the police. You can’t carve up your own children!”

“But will it help her—if he gets in trouble?” Homer asked.
“Precisely,” Wally said. “We’re not helping her by going to the police.”
“Or by speaking to him,” Angel said.

Candy had learned to ignore this.

away from him. I mean, she could just stay here, even after the harvest.”

“But what would she do?” Candy asked.
“There aren’t any jobs around,” said Homer Wells. “Not after the harvest.”
“It’s one thing having them pick,” Wally said carefully. “I mean, everyone

accepts them, but they’re only migrants—they’re transients. They’re
supposed to move on. I don’t think that a colored woman with an illegitimate
child is going to be made to feel all that welcome in Maine. Not if she’s
staying.”

Candy was cross. She said, “Wally, in all the years I’ve been here, I’ve never

heard anyone call them niggers, or say anything bad about them. This isn’t the
South,” she added proudly.

“Come on,” Wally said. “It only isn’t the South because they don’t live here.

Let one of them actually try to live here and see what they call her.”

“I don’t believe that,” Candy said.
“Then you’re dumb,” Wally said. “Isn’t she, old boy?” Wally asked Homer.
But Homer Wells was watching Angel. “Are you in love with Rose Rose,

Angel?” Homer asked his son.

“Yes,” Angel said. “And I think she likes me—at least a little.” He cleared

his own dishes and went upstairs to his room.

“He’s in love with the girl,” Homer said to Candy and Wally.
“As plain as the nose on your face, old boy,” Wally said. “Where have you

been?” He wheeled himself out on the terrace and took a few turns around the
swimming pool.

“What do you think of that?” Homer asked Candy. “Angel’s in love!”
“I hope it makes him more sympathetic to us,” Candy told him. “That’s what

I think about it.”

were his rules?

was some mail for him in the apple-mart office. “I keep meaning to bring it up
to the house,” Wally told him, “but I keep forgetting it.”

“Just keep forgetting it,” Homer advised him. “It’s the harvest. Since I don’t

have time to answer any mail, I might as well not read it.”

Larch’s letter, and with a letter from Melony.

Melony had returned the questionnaire to Homer. She hadn’t filled it out;

she’d read it a few times, she could tell—by the nature of the questions—that
the board of trustees were, in her opinion, a collection of the usual assholes.
“The guys in suits,” she called them. “Don’t you hate men in suits?” she’d
asked Lorna.

“Come on,” Lorna had told her. “You just hate men, all men.”
“Men in suits, especially,” Melony had said.
Across the questionnaire, which would never be filled out, Melony had

written a brief message to Homer Wells.

DEAR SUNSHINE,

I THOUGHT YOU WAS GOING TO BE A HERO. MY MISTAKE. SORRY FOR HARD TIME.

LOVE, MELONY

Homer Wells would read that, much later that same night, when he couldn’t

sleep, as usual, and he decided to get up and read his mail. He would read Dr.
Larch’s letter, and Nurse Caroline’s, too, and any doubts that were remaining
about the doctor’s bag with the initials F.S. engraved in gold had disappeared
with the darkness just before dawn.

Homer saw no reason to add irony to their predicament; he decided not to

send Melony’s response to the questionnaire to Larch or to Nurse Caroline—
how would it help them to know that they had turned themselves in when they
might have gone on for another few years? He sent a single, short note,
addressed to them both. The note was simple and mathematical.

1. I AM NOT A DOCTOR.

2. I BELIEVE THE FETUS HAS A SOUL.

3. I’M SORRY.

“Sorry?” said Wilbur Larch, when Nurse Caroline read him the note. “He

says he’s sorry?”

“Of course, he isn’t a doctor,” Nurse Angela admitted. “There’d always be

something he’d think he didn’t know; he’d always be thinking he was going
to make an amateur mistake.”

“That’s why he’d be a good doctor,” said Dr. Larch. “Doctors who think

they know everything are the ones who make the most amateur mistakes.
That’s how a good doctor should be thinking: that there’s always something
he doesn’t know, that he can always kill someone.”

“We’re in for it, now,” Nurse Edna said.
“He believes the fetus has a soul, does he?” Larch asked. “Fine. He believes

that a creature that lives like a fish has a soul—and what sort of soul does he
believe those of us walking around have? He should believe in what he can
see! If he’s going to play God and tell us who’s got a soul, he should take care

of the souls who can talk back to him!” He was ranting.

Then Nurse Angela said, “So. We wait and see.”
“Not me,” said Wilbur Larch. “Homer can wait and see,” he said, “but not

me.”

mathematical note to Homer Wells.

1. YOU KNOW EVERYTHING I KNOW, PLUS WHAT YOU’VE TAUGHT YOURSELF.
YOU’RE A BETTER DOCTOR THAN I AM—AND YOU KNOW IT.
2. YOU THINK WHAT I DO IS PLAYING GOD, BUT YOU PRESUME YOU KNOW WHAT
GOD WANTS. DO YOU THINK THAT’S NOT PLAYING GOD?
3. I AM NOT SORRY—NOT FOR ANYTHING I’VE DONE (ONE ABORTION I DID NOT
PERFORM IS THE ONLY ONE I’M SORRY FOR). I’M NOT EVEN SORRY THAT I LOVE YOU.

Then Dr. Larch walked to the railroad station and waited for the train; he

wanted to see the note sent on its way. Later, the stationmaster whom Larch
rarely acknowledged admitted he was surprised that Larch spoke to him; but
because Larch spoke after the train had gone, the stationmaster thought that
Larch might have been addressing the departed train.

“Good-bye,” Dr. Larch said. He walked back up the hill to the orphanage.

Mrs. Grogan asked him if he wanted some tea, but Dr. Larch told her that he
felt too tired for tea; he wanted to lie down.

Nurse Caroline and Nurse Edna were picking apples, and Larch went a little

way up the hill to speak to them. “You’re too old to pick apples, Edna,” Larch
told her. “Let Caroline and the children do it.” He then walked a short
distance with Nurse Caroline, back toward the orphanage. “If I had to be
anything,” he told her, “I’d probably be a socialist, but I don’t want to be
anything.”

Then he went into the dispensary and closed the door. Despite the harvest

weather, it was still warm enough to have the window open during the day; he
closed the window, too. It was a new, full can of ether; perhaps he jabbed the
safety pin too roughly into the can, or else he wiggled it around too
impatiently. The ether dripped onto the face mask more freely than usual; his
hand kept slipping off the cone before he could get enough to satisfy himself.
He turned a little toward the wall; that way, the edge of the windowsill
maintained contact with the mask over his mouth and nose after his fingers
relaxed their grip. There was just enough pressure from the windowsill to
hold the cone in place.

This time he traveled to Paris; how lively it was there, at the end of World

War I. The young doctor was constantly embraced by the natives. He
remembered sitting with an American soldier—an amputee—in a café; all the
patrons bought them Cognac. The soldier put out his cigar in a snifter of

Cognac that he couldn’t finish—not if he intended to stand on his crutches,
with his one leg—and Wilbur Larch breathed deeply of that aroma. That was
how Paris smelled—like Cognac and ash.

That, and like perfume. Larch had walked the soldier home—he’d been a

good doctor, even there, even then. He was a third crutch to the drunken man,
he was the man’s missing leg. That was when the woman had accosted them.
She was a whore, quite clearly, and she was quite young, and quite pregnant;
Larch, who didn’t understand French very well, assumed that she wanted an
abortion. He was trying to tell her that she was too late, that she’d have to go
through with having this baby, when he suddenly understood that she was
asking only what a whore is usually asking.

in Larch’s arms; it was to Larch alone that the woman was offering the
“pleasure of love.”

“Non, merci,” Wilbur Larch mumbled. But the soldier collapsed; Larch

needed the pregnant prostitute to help carry him. When they delivered the
soldier to his room, the woman renewed her offer to Wilbur Larch. He had to
hold her at arm’s length to keep her away from him—and still she would slip
through his grasp and push her firm belly into him.

“Plaisir d’amour!” she said.
“Non, non!” he told her; he had to wave his arms to keep her away. One

hand, swinging back and forth beside the bed, knocked over the ether can
with the loose pin. Slowly, the puddle developed on the linoleum floor; it
spread under the bed, and all around him. The strength of the fumes
overpowered him—the woman in Paris had smelled very strongly, too. Her
perfume was strong, and stronger still was the effluvia of her trade. By the
time Larch moved his face away from the windowsill and the cone fell, he
was already gagging.

“Kings of New England!” He thought he was summoning them, but no one
could hear him, and the French woman lay down beside him and snuggled her
heavy belly against him. She hugged him so tightly that he couldn’t breathe,
and her flavorful, tangy aroma made the tears run down his cheeks. He
thought he was vomiting; he was.

“Plaisir d’amour,” she whispered.
“Oui, merci,” he said, giving in to her. “Oui, merci.”
The cause of death would be respiratory failure, due to aspiration of vomit,

which would lead to cardiac arrest. The board of trustees—in light of the
evidence submitted against him—would privately call it a suicide; the man
was about to be disgraced, they told themselves. But those who knew him and

understood his ether habit would say that it was the kind of accident a tired
man would have. Certainly, Mrs. Grogan knew—and Nurse Angela, and
Nurse Edna, and Nurse Caroline knew, too—that he was not a man “about to
be disgraced”; rather, he was a man about to be no longer of use. And a man
of use, Wilbur Larch had thought, was all that he was born to be.

Nurse Edna, who for some time would remain almost speechless, found his

body. The dispensary door was not a perfect seal, and she thought that the
odor was especially strong and that Dr. Larch had been in there longer than
usual.

troubled thrush, a quavering passage of Jane Eyre to the girls’ division.

An orphan loves and needs routine, the women reminded each other.
Nurse Caroline, who was tough as nails and found Dickens a sentimental

bore, had a firm grasp of the language; she read aloud an almost hearty
passage of David Copperfield to the boys’ division. But she found herself
broken by the prospect of the expected benediction.

It was Nurse Angela who said it all, according to the rules.
“Let us be happy for Doctor Larch,” she said to the attentive children.

“Doctor Larch has found a family. Good night, Doctor Larch,” Nurse Angela
said.

“Good night, Doctor Larch!” the children called.
“Good night, Wilbur!” Nurse Edna managed to say, while Nurse Angela

summoned her strength for the usual refrain, and Nurse Caroline, who hoped
the evening wind would dry her tears, marched down the hill to the railroad
station—once again to inform the frightened stationmaster that there was a
body in St. Cloud’s.

That Sunday at Ocean View was an Indian summer day, and Homer Wells
was fishing. Not real fishing: Homer was trying to find out more about the
relationship between Mr. Rose and his daughter. The two men sat on the cider
house roof—for the most part, they weren’t talking. Not talking too much,
Homer assumed, was the only way to go fishing with Mr. Rose.

Below them, Angel was trying to teach Rose Rose how to ride a bicycle.

Homer had offered to drive Rose Rose and Angel to the beach (and to drive
back and pick them up at some designated hour), but it mattered to Angel that
he and Rose Rose were independent—to be driven to the beach only
emphasized that he was still waiting to be old enough to get his driver’s
license. The beach was too far to walk to, and Homer wouldn’t allow Angel
to hitchhike; but it was only a four- or five-mile ride on a bike, and the road
was mostly flat.

Rose to succeed on the bicycle; he knew how much preparation had gone into
the proposed trip—how Angel had fussed over both his own and Candy’s
bicycles, and how Angel had discussed (with Candy) which of Candy’s
bathing suits would be the most suitable for Rose Rose. Together, they had
chosen an emerald-green one—it had one pink, spiraled, barber-pole stripe,
and Candy was sure the suit would fit Rose Rose better than it fit her; it had
always been too loose in the bust and in the hips for Candy.

guess,” Homer Wells observed of the bicycle lesson. Angel would run
alongside the wobbly bicycle, which Rose Rose struggled to ride. After the
bike was moving at a comfortable speed, Angel would release his hold on it.
Rose Rose would either not pedal—hugging the bike until it simply ran out of
speed and toppled—or else she would pedal furiously, but without guidance.
She seemed unable to balance the bicycle and pedal it at the same time. And
her hands appeared frozen on the handlebars; for her to balance, and pedal,
and steer simultaneously looked, increasingly, like a distant miracle.

“Can you ride one?” Mr. Rose asked Homer.
“I never tried,” said Homer Wells. “I’d probably have a little trouble,” he

admitted; it looked easy enough to him. There were no bicycles at the
orphanage; the children might have used them to ride away. The only bicycle
in St. Cloud’s was the stationmaster’s, and he rarely rode it.

“I never tried, either,” said Mr. Rose. He watched his daughter careen over a

slight hill; she shrieked, the bike jackknifed, she fell—and Angel Wells ran to
her, to help her up.

drinking coffee, some were drinking beer, but all of them watched the bicycle
lesson. Some were encouraging—and as vocal as local fans, rooting at a
sporting event—and others watched the procedure as placidly as Mr. Rose.

—grew spottier and more random.

“Don’t give up,” Angel said to Rose Rose.
“I not givin’ up,” Rose Rose said. “Did I say I was givin’ up?”
“You remember what you said to me, once, about the rules?” Homer asked

Mr. Rose.

“What rules?” Mr. Rose asked.
“You know, those rules I put up every year in the cider house,” Homer said.

“And you mentioned that you had other rules—your own rules for living
here.”

“Yeah, those rules,” said Mr. Rose.

thought they were about being careful,” Homer said. “Sort of like my rules,
too, I guess.”

“Say what you mean, Homer,” said Mr. Rose.
“Is someone getting hurt?” Homer asked. “I mean, this year—is there some

kind of trouble?”

were sweating. It appeared to Homer that Rose Rose was jouncing on the seat
too hard, almost intentionally hurting herself; or else she was treating herself
so roughly in order to give herself the intensity she needed to master the
machine. She wobbled off a knoll, out of sight behind some apple trees, and
Angel sprinted after her.

been there by now.”

“Why don’t someone take ’em in some car?” another man asked.
“They wanna do it they own way,” Muddy said. There was a little laughter

about that.

to him, but he was speaking to the men, who stopped laughing. “Pretty soon,
that bicycle gonna break,” Mr. Rose said to Homer.

Rose Rose was wearing a pair of blue jeans, some heavy work shoes and a

white T-shirt; because she was sweating, the outline and the colors of the
emerald-green and pink bathing suit were visible through her shirt.

“Imagine her learnin’ to swim,” said Mr. Rose.
Homer Wells felt bad for Angel, but another subject weighed more heavily

on his mind.

“About someone being hurt,” Homer said. “About the rules.”
Mr. Rose reached into his pocket, slowly, and Homer half expected to see

the knife, but it was not the knife that Mr. Rose removed from his pocket and
very gently placed in Homer’s hand—it was the burned-down nub of a
candle. It was what was left of the candle Candy had lit for their lovemaking
in the cider house. In her panic—when she thought it was Wally who had
caught them there—she had forgotten it.

Homer closed his fingers around the candle, and Mr. Rose patted his hand.
“That ’gainst the rules, ain’t it?” Mr. Rose asked Homer.
Black Pan was baking corn bread and the smell rose from the cider house

and hung deliciously over the roof, which was warming in the late-morning
sun; pretty soon, it would be uncomfortably hot on the roof.

“Ain’t that bread ready to eat yet?” Peaches hollered into the kitchen.
“No it ain’t,” Black Pan said from inside the cider house. “And pipe down,

or you wake the baby.”

“Shit,” Peaches said. Black Pan came outside and kicked Peaches—not

terribly hard—where he was leaning against the cider house wall.

him.

“I wasn’t callin’ nothin’ ‘shit,’ man—I was just sayin’ it,” Peaches said.
“Just pipe down,” Black Pan said. He observed the bicycle lesson. “How it

comin’ with that?” he asked.

“They tryin’ hard,” Muddy said.
“They inventin’ a new sport,” Peaches said, and everyone laughed.
“Show some respect,” said Mr. Rose, and everyone piped down. Black Pan

went back inside the cider house.

“What you bet he burns the bread?” Peaches asked quietly.
“If he burns it, it ’cause he took the time to kick your ass,” Muddy told him.
The bicycle was broken; either the rear wheel wouldn’t turn, or else the

chain was jammed in the wheel.

“There’s another bicycle,” Angel told Rose Rose. “You try that one, while I

fix this one.” But while he fixed Candy’s bicycle, Rose Rose had to suffer
with a boy’s bicycle, so that in addition to her troubles, she slipped and hurt
her crotch against the crossbar. Homer was actually worried about how hard a
fall she had, and he asked her if she was all right.

Angel managed to get Candy’s bicycle running again.

“It looks hopeless,” Homer confided to Mr. Rose.
“What about them rules?” Mr. Rose asked him. Homer put the candle in his

pocket. He and Mr. Rose regarded each other—it was almost a contest, the
way they looked at each other.

“I’m worried about your daughter,” said Homer Wells, after a while.

Together they watched Rose Rose fall off the bicycle again.

“Don’t worry about her,” said Mr. Rose.
“She looks unhappy, sometimes,” Homer said.
“She ain’t unhappy,” Mr. Rose said.
“Are you worried about her?” Homer asked him.
“Once you start worryin’, you can worry ’bout anybody, can’t you?” said

Mr. Rose.

It appeared to Homer Wells that her fall against the crossbar was still giving

Rose Rose some pain because she stood for a while with her hands on her
knees and her head down (as if her stomach hurt her) each time she fell off the
bicycle.

Homer and Mr. Rose missed the moment when she gave up. They just

noticed that she was running off, in the direction of the orchard called Frying
Pan, and that Angel was running after her; both bicycles were left behind.

beach. Maybe I can convince them to let me drive them there.”

command than a suggestion. “They don’t have to go to no beach,” Mr. Rose
said, more mildly. “They just young, they not sure how to have a good time,”
he said. “Just think what might happen at the beach. They might get drowned.
Or some people might not like seein’ a white boy with a colored girl—and
they both in bathin’ suits. It better they don’t go nowhere,” Mr. Rose
concluded. That was the end of that subject, because then Mr. Rose asked,
“Are you happy, Homer?”

“Am I happy?” said Homer Wells.
“Why you repeat every single thing?” Mr. Rose asked him.
“I don’t know,” Homer said. “I’m happy, sometimes,” he said cautiously.
“That good,” said Mr. Rose. “And Mistuh and Missus Worthington—are

they happy?”

“I think they’re pretty happy, most of the time,” Homer told him.
“That good,” said Mr. Rose.
Peaches, who’d had a few beers, approached Angel’s bicycle warily, as if

the machine were dangerous even when it was lying on the ground.

and grinned at the men.

“How do it start?” he asked them, and they all laughed.
Muddy got up from against the wall and went over to Candy’s bicycle.
“I have you a race,” he said to Peaches.
“Yeah,” said Black Pan, in the cider house door. “We see which one of you

falls down first.”

“Mine ain’t got no middle,” Muddy observed of Candy’s bike.
“That make it go faster,” Peaches said. He tried to move Angel’s bike

forward, as if his feet were paddles.

everyone laughed. Black Pan ran up behind Peaches and started pushing him
faster.

“Cut that shit out!” Peaches cried, but Black Pan got the bike rolling so fast

that he couldn’t keep up with it.

of the men got him rolling faster than Peaches, who had disappeared over a
hill into the next field (from which the men could hear him screaming).

the front wheel rose off the ground, and then the bicycle rode right out from
under him. The men were howling now, and Black Pan picked up Muddy’s
fallen bicycle; he was the next to try it.

“You gonna try it, too?” Mr. Rose asked Homer.
As long as Angel and Candy weren’t around to watch him, Homer thought

he would. “Sure,” Homer said. “I’m next!” he yelled at Black Pan, who was
balancing the bicycle in place, his feet slipping off the pedals; he fell over on
his side before he could get moving.

“That was no real turn!” Black Pan said. “I get another try.”
“Are you going to try it?” Homer asked Mr. Rose.
“Not me,” said Mr. Rose.
“The baby’s cryin’,” someone said.
“Go pick her up,” said someone else.
“I’ll take care of that,” said Mr. Rose to all of them. “I’ll watch the baby—

you all play.”

he was limping.

“It hit a tree,” he explained. “It went right at the tree like the tree was its

enemy.”

“You supposed to steer it,” Muddy told him.
“It steer itself,” Peaches said. “It don’t listen to me.”
Homer supported Black Pan while the cook mounted Candy’s bike a second

time. “Here we go,” Black Pan said with determination, but he kept one arm
wrapped around Homer’s neck; he had only one hand on the handlebars, and
he wasn’t pedaling.

“You’ve got to pedal it, to make it go,” Homer told him.
“You got to push me first,” Black Pan said.
“Somethin’ burnin’!” someone shouted.
“Oh shit, my corn bread!” Black Pan said. He lunged to one side, his arm

still around Homer’s neck so that Homer fell over with him—on top of the
bicycle.

“I told you he was gonna burn that bread,” Peaches told Muddy.
“Give me that bike,” Muddy said, taking Angel’s bike away from Peaches.
Two of the men were giving Homer a push.
“I got it, I got it,” Homer told them, so they let go. But he didn’t have it. He

veered sharply in one direction, then he veered back toward the men, who had
to run out of his way; then he jackknifed the bike and went tumbling one way
—the bike went another.

ground.

howled.

“It help, if you white, most of the time,” said Mr. Rose. He stood in the cider

house door, the smoke from the burning corn bread billowing behind him, his
daughter’s daughter in his arms—the pacifier a seemingly permanent fixture
in her mouth. And after Mr. Rose had spoken, he stuck a pacifier in his
mouth, too.

In the heart of the valley that was at the bottom of Frying Pan, where the
ocean might be a hundred miles away and no breath from the sea ever
reached, Rose Rose was stretched out in the dark grass under a Northern Spy
that no one had picked yet; Angel Wells was stretched out beside her. She let
her arm loll on his waist; he ran his finger very lightly over her face,
following the line of her scar down her nose to her lip. When he got to her lip,
she held his hand still and kissed his finger.

She had taken off the work shoes and the blue jeans, but she kept Candy’s

bathing suit and the T-shirt on.

“Wouldn’t of had no fun at no beach, anyway,” she said.
“We’ll go another day,” Angel said.
“We won’t go nowhere,” she said. They kissed each other for a while. Then

Rose Rose said, “Tell me ’bout it again.” Angel Wells began to describe the
ocean, but she interrupted him. “No, not that part,” she said. “I don’t care
’bout no ocean. Tell me ’bout the other part—where we all livin’ together in
the same house. You and me and my baby and your father and Mistuh and
Missus Worthington,” Rose Rose said. “That the part that get to me,” she said,
smiling.

And he began again: about how it was possible. He was sure that his father

and Wally and Candy wouldn’t object.

“You all crazy,” she told Angel. “But go on,” she said.
There was plenty of room, Angel assured her.
“Ain’t nobody gonna mind ’bout the baby?” she asked him; she shut her

eyes; with her eyes shut, she could see what Angel was describing a little
better.

That was when Angel Wells became a fiction writer, whether he knew it or

not. That’s when he learned how to make the make-believe matter to him
more than real life mattered to him; that’s when he learned how to paint a
picture that was not real and never would be real, but in order to be believed
at all—even on a sunny Indian summer day—it had to be better made and
seem more real than real; it had to sound at least possible. Angel talked all
day; he just went on and on and on; he would be a novelist before nightfall. In

his story, Rose Rose and everyone else got along famously. No one objected
to anything anyone else did. All of it, as they say in Maine, worked out.

Sometimes, Rose Rose cried a little; more often, they just kissed. Only a few

times did she interrupt him, usually because she wanted him to repeat
something that had seemed especially unlikely to her. “Hold on a minute,”
she’d say to Angel. “Better go over that again, ’cause I must be slow.”

Angel’s mind how, some evening, Rose Rose could ask Wally to tell her what
the rice paddy mosquitoes were like.

“An Ocean View mosquito isn’t anything compared to a Japanese B

mosquito,” Wally would have told her, but Angel didn’t get to tell Rose Rose
this part of the fantasy. She was starting to stand up when an apparent cramp,
or the pain from her fall against the bicycle’s crossbar, dropped her to her
knees as if she’d been kicked, and Angel caught her around her shoulders.

“You hurt yourself on the bicycle, didn’t you?” he asked her.
“I was tryin’ to,” she said then.
“What?” he asked her.
“I was tryin’ to hurt myself,” Rose Rose told him, “but I don’t think I hurt

myself enough.”

“Enough for what?” he asked.
“To lose the baby,” she told him.
“You’re pregnant?” Angel asked her.
“Again,” she said. “Again and again, I guess,” she said. “Somebody must

want me to keep havin’ babies.”

“Who?” Angel asked her.
“Never mind,” she told him.
“Someone who’s not here?” he asked.
“Oh, he here,” Rose Rose said. “But never mind.”
“The father is here?” Angel asked.
“The father of this one—yeah, he here,” she said, patting her flat stomach.
“Who is he?” Angel asked.
“Never mind who he is,” she told Angel. “Tell me that part again—only

better make it two babies. Now they me and you, and everybody else, and two
babies,” she said. “Won’t we all have fun?”

him—and she changed her tone of voice.

no fun at no beach, Angel.”

“Do you want the baby?” he asked her.
“I want the one I got,” she told him. “I don’t want this other one!” She

struck herself as hard as she could when she said “other”; she bent herself
over again, she’d knocked the wind out of herself. She lay in the grass in what
Angel could not help observing was a fetal position.

“You wanna love me or help me?” she asked him.
“Both,” he said miserably.
“Ain’t no such thing as both,” she said. “If you smart, you just stick with

helpin’ me—that easier.”

“You can stay with me,” Angel began—again.
“Don’t tell me no more ’bout that!” Rose Rose said angrily. “Don’t tell me

no more names for my baby, either. Just plain help me,” she said.

“How?” Angel asked. “Anything,” he told her.
“Just get me an abortion,” Rose Rose said. “I don’t live ’round here, I don’t

know nobody to ask, and I got no money.”

Angel thought that the money he’d been saving to buy his first car would
probably be enough money for an abortion—he had saved about five hundred
dollars—but the problem was that the money was in a savings account, the
trustees of which were his father and Candy; Angel couldn’t take any money
out without their signatures. And when Angel called Herb Fowler at home,
the news regarding the abortionist was typically vague.

“There’s some old fart named Hood who does ’em,” Herb told Angel. “He’s

a retired doctor from Cape Kenneth. But he does the business in his summer
house over on Drinkwater. Lucky for you it’s still almost summer. I heard he
does ’em in the summer house even if it’s the middle of the winter.”

“Do you know what it costs?” Angel asked Herb.
“A lot,” Herb said. “But it don’t cost as much as a baby.”
“Thanks, Herb,” Angel said.
“Congratulations,” Herb Fowler told the boy. “I didn’t know your pecker

was long enough.”

“It’s long enough,” Angel said bravely.
But when Angel looked in the phone book, there was no Dr. Hood among

the many Hoods in that part of Maine, and Herb Fowler didn’t know the
man’s first name. Angel knew he couldn’t call everyone named Hood and ask,
each time, if this was the abortionist. Angel also knew he’d have to speak to
Candy and his father in order to get the money, and so he didn’t delay in
telling them the whole story.

“God, what a good boy Angel is!” Wally would say later. “He never tries to

keep anything from anybody. He just comes right out with it—no matter what
it is.”

“She wouldn’t tell you who the father is?” Homer Wells asked Angel.

“No, she wouldn’t,” Angel said.
“Maybe Muddy,” Wally said.
“Probably Peaches,” Candy said.
“What’s it matter if she doesn’t want to say who the father is? The main

thing is she doesn’t want the baby,” said Homer Wells. “The main thing is to
get her an abortion.” Wally and Candy were quiet; they wouldn’t question
Homer’s authority on this subject.

“The problem is, how do we know which Hood to call, when the phone

book doesn’t say which one is the doctor?” Angel asked.

“I know which one it is,” Homer said, “and he’s not a doctor.”
“Herb said he was a retired doctor,” Angel said.
“He’s a retired biology teacher,” said Homer Wells, who knew exactly

which Mr. Hood it was. Homer also remembered that Mr. Hood had once
confused a rabbit’s uteri with a sheep’s. He wondered how many uteri Mr.
Hood imagined women had? And would he be more careful if he knew a
woman had only one?

“A biology teacher?” Angel asked.
“Not a very good one, either,” Homer said.
“Herb Fowler has never known shit about anything,” Wally said.
The thought of what Mr. Hood might not know gave Homer Wells the

shivers.

take her to Saint Cloud’s,” he told Angel.

it, I don’t think she’d want to leave it in the orphanage.”

She can have an abortion there.”

Wally moved the wheelchair back and forth.
Candy said: “I had an abortion there, once, Angel.”
“You did?” Angel said.
“At the time,” Wally told the boy, “we thought we’d always be able to have

another baby.”

“It was before Wally was hurt—before the war,” Candy began.
“Doctor Larch does it?” Angel asked his father.
“Right,” said Homer Wells. He was thinking that he should put Angel and

Rose Rose on a train to St. Cloud’s as soon as possible; with all the
“evidence” that had been submitted to the board of trustees, Homer didn’t
know how much more time Dr. Larch would have to practice.

Rose on the next train.”

“Or I could drive them in the Cadillac,” Wally said.
“It’s too far for you to drive, Wally,” Homer told him.
“Baby Rose can stay here, with me,” Candy said.
They decided that it would be best if Candy went to the cider house and

brought Rose Rose and her baby back to the house. Mr. Rose might give Rose
Rose an argument if Angel showed up at night, wanting Rose Rose and the
baby to go off with him.

“He won’t argue with me,” Candy said. “I’ll just say I’ve found a lot of old

baby clothes, and that Rose Rose and I are going to dress up the baby in
everything that fits her.”

“At night?” Wally said. “For Christ’s sake, Mister Rose isn’t a fool.”
“I don’t care if he believes me,” Candy said. “I just want to get the girl and

her baby out of there.”

“Is there that much of a rush?” Wally asked.
“Yes, I’m afraid there is,” said Homer Wells. He had not told Candy or

Wally about Dr. Larch’s desire to replace himself, or what revelations and
fictions had been delivered to the board. An orphan learns to keep things to
himself; an orphan holds things in. What comes out of orphans comes out of
them slowly.

their grief, in their mourning for Dr. Larch, they had determined that Nurse
Caroline had the sturdiest voice over the phone. And they had all been trying
to familiarize themselves with Dr. Larch’s plans, for everything, and with his
massive A Brief History of St. Cloud’s as well. Every time the phone rang,
they assumed it was someone from the board of trustees.

man.”

Nurse Angela and Nurse Edna, and even Mrs. Grogan, would love Homer

Wells forever—in spite of his note of denial—but Nurse Caroline was
younger than any of them; she did not feel the abiding sweetness for Homer
Wells that comes from knowing someone when he’s a baby. She felt he had
betrayed Larch. And, of course, it was a bad time for him to ask for “the old
man.” When Larch had died, Nurse Angela and Nurse Edna and Mrs. Grogan
had said they were not up to calling Homer; Nurse Caroline hadn’t wanted to
call him.

“What do you want?” Nurse Caroline asked him coldly. “Or have you

changed your mind?”

“There’s a friend of my son’s,” said Homer Wells. “She’s one of the

migrants here. She’s already got a baby who’s got no father, and now she’s
going to have another.”

“Then she’ll have two,” Nurse Caroline informed him.
“Caroline!” said Homer Wells. “Cut the shit. I want to talk to the old man.”
“I’d like to talk to him, too,” Nurse Caroline told him, her voice rising.

“Larch is dead, Homer,” she said more quietly.

“Cut the shit,” said Homer Wells; he felt his heart dancing.
“Too much ether,” she said. “There’s no more Lord’s work in Saint Cloud’s.

If you know someone who needs it, you’ll have to do it yourself.”

Then she hung up on him—she really slammed the phone down. His ear

rang; he heard the sound of the logs bashing together in the water that swept
the Winkles away. His eyes had not stung so sharply since that night in the
Drapers’ furnace room, in Waterville, when he had dressed himself for his
getaway. His throat had not ached so deeply—the pain pushing down, into his
lungs—since that night he had yelled across the river, trying to make the
Maine woods repeat the name of Fuzzy Stone.

Snowy, thought Homer Wells. He imagined that the other orphans would have
difficulty finding happiness in the furniture business. At times, he admitted,
he had been very happy in the apple business. He knew what Larch would
have told him: that his happiness was not the point, or that it wasn’t as
important as his usefulness.

always looked a little lost. He remembered them in the gaslit sleigh—their
faces were especially vivid to him when the sled runners would cut through
the snow and strike sparks against the ground; how the women had winced at
that grating sound. And, briefly, when the town had cared enough to provide a
bus service, how isolated the women had seemed in the sealed buses, their
faces cloudy behind the fogged glass; through the windows they had appeared
to Homer Wells the way the world appeared to them, just before the ether
transported them.

there were more of them than he’d remembered. They were an army,
advancing on the orphanage hospital, bearing with them a single wound.

go, and what would happen to Mrs. Grogan? worried Homer Wells. He
remembered the hatred and contempt in Melony’s eyes. If Melony were
pregnant, I would help her, he thought. And with that thought he realized that
he was willing to play God, a little.

God; when you were willing to play God—at all—you played a lot.

the burned-down nub of the candle Mr. Rose had returned to him—“That
’gainst the rules, ain’t it?” Mr. Rose had asked him.

battered copy of David Copperfield. Homer didn’t have to open the book to
know how the story began. “ ‘Whether I shall turn out to be the hero of my
own life, or whether that station will be held by anybody else, these pages
must show,’ ” he recited from memory.

ether cones that Larch insisted upon making himself. The apparatus was
rudimentary: Larch shaped a cone out of an ordinary huckaback towel;
between the layers of the towel were layers of stiff paper to keep the cone
from collapsing. At the open tip of the cone was a wad of cotton—to absorb
the ether. Crude, but Larch could make one in three minutes; they were
different sizes for different faces.

Homer had preferred the ready-made Yankauer mask—a wire-mesh mask,

shaped like a soup ladle, wrapped with ten or twelve layers of gauze. It was
into the old Yankauer mask on his bedside table that Homer deposited the
remains of the cider house candle. He kept change in the mask, and
sometimes his watch. Now he peered into it; the mask contained a piece of
chewing gum in a faded green wrapper and the tortoiseshell button from his
tweed jacket. The gauze in the mask was yellow and dusty, but all the mask
needed was fresh gauze. Homer Wells made up his mind; he would be a hero.

He went downstairs to the kitchen where Angel was pushing Wally around

in the wheelchair—it was a game they played when they were both restless.
Angel stood on the back of the wheelchair and pushed it, the way you push a
scooter; he got the chair going faster and faster—much faster than Wally
could make it move by himself. Wally just steered—he kept turning and
turning. Wally kept trying to miss the furniture, but despite his skill as a pilot
and the good size of the kitchen floor, eventually Angel would get the chair
going too fast to control and they’d crash into something. Candy got angry at
them for it, but they did it, anyway (especially when she was out of the
house). Wally called it “flying”; most of all, it was something they did when
they were bored. Candy had gone to the cider house to get Rose Rose and her
baby. Angel and Wally were freewheeling.

When they saw how Homer looked, they stopped.
“What’s the matter, old boy?” Wally asked his friend.
Homer knelt by Wally’s wheelchair and put his head in Wally’s lap.
“Doctor Larch is dead,” he told Wally, who held Homer while he cried. He

cried a very short time; in Homer’s memory, Curly Day had been the only
orphan who ever cried for a long time. When Homer stopped crying, he said

to Angel, “I’ve got a little story for you—and I’m going to need your help.”

Homer opened one of the quarter-pound ether cans with a safety pin. The
fumes made his eyes tear a little; he’d never understood how Larch could like
the stuff.

“He got addicted to it,” Homer told his son. “But he used to have the lightest

touch. I’ve seen patients talking back to him while they were under, and still
they didn’t feel a thing.”

in his room—first with the rubber sheet they’d used when Angel had still
been in diapers; then the usual sheets (but clean ones) over that.

“For Baby Rose?” Angel asked his father.
“No, not for Baby Rose,” Homer said. When he unpacked the instruments,

Angel sat down on the other bed and watched him.

“The water’s boiling!” Wally called upstairs.
“You remember how I used to tell you that I was Doctor Larch’s helper?”

Homer asked Angel.

“Right,” said Angel Wells.
“Well, I got very good—at helping him,” Homer said. “Very good. I’m not

an amateur,” he told his son. “That’s really it—that’s the little story,” Homer
said, when he’d arranged everything he needed where he could see it;
everything looked timeless, everything looked perfect.

“Go on,” Angel Wells told his father. “Go on with the story.”
Downstairs, in the quiet house, they heard Wally in his wheelchair, rolling

from room to room; he was still flying.

the Yankauer mask. He began with that old business about the Lord’s work
and the Devil’s—how, to Wilbur Larch, it was all the work of the Lord.

It startled Candy: how the headlights from her Jeep caught all the men in the
starkest silhouettes against the sky; how they were perched in a row, like huge
birds, along the cider house roof. She thought that everyone must be up there
—but not everyone was. Mr. Rose and his daughter were inside the cider
house, and the men were waiting where they’d been told to wait.

When Candy got out of the Jeep, no one spoke to her. There were no lights

on in the cider house; if her headlights hadn’t exposed the men on the roof,
Candy would have thought that everyone had gone to bed.

“Hello!” Candy called up to the roof. “One day, that whole roof is going to

cave in.” It suddenly frightened her: how they wouldn’t speak to her. But the
men were more frightened than Candy was; the men didn’t know what to say

—they knew only that what Mr. Rose was doing to his daughter was wrong,
and that they were too afraid to do anything about it.

“Muddy?” Candy asked in the darkness.
“Yes, Missus Worthington!” Muddy called down to her. She went over to the

corner of the cider house where the roof dipped closest to the ground; it was
where everyone climbed up; an old picking ladder was leaned up against the
roof there, but no one on the roof moved to hold the ladder steady for her.

“Peaches?” Candy said.
“Yes, ma’am,” Peaches said.
“Please, someone hold the ladder,” she said. Muddy and Peaches held the

ladder, and Black Pan held her hand when she climbed up on the roof. The
men made room for her, and she sat down with them.

there; and if Mr. Rose had been there, Candy knew he would have spoken to
her.

The first time she heard the sound from the cider house—it came from

directly under her—Candy thought it was the baby, just babbling or maybe
beginning to cry.

“When your Wally was a boy, it was different—out there,” Black Pan said to

her. “It look like another country then.” His gaze was fixed upon the
twinkling coast.

“Ain’t it a pretty night, ma’am?” It was decidedly not a pretty night; it was a
darker night than usual, and the sound from the cider house was now
comprehensible to her. For a second, she thought she was going to be sick.

Candy stamped her feet on the roof; then she knelt down and began to beat on
the tin with both her hands.

“It’s so old a roof, Missus Worthington,” Black Pan said to her. “You best be

careful you don’t fall through it.”

“Get me down, get me off,” Candy said to them. Muddy and Peaches took

her arms and Black Pan preceded them to the ladder. Even walking down the
roof, Candy tried to keep stamping her feet.

name of “Rose Rose,” and she couldn’t make herself say “Mister Rose,”
either. “Rose!” she called ambiguously. She wasn’t even sure which one she
was summoning, but it was Mr. Rose who met her at the cider house door. He
was still getting dressed—he was tucking his shirt in and buttoning his
trousers. He looked thinner and older to her than he’d looked before, and
although he smiled at her, he didn’t look into her eyes with his usual

confidence—with his usual, polite indifference.

“Your daughter and her baby are coming with me.” Candy walked by him into
the cider house; she felt the tattered rules with her fingers as she found the
light.

she hadn’t closed them, and she had pulled the T-shirt on, but she held
Candy’s bathing suit in her lap—she was unfamiliar with wearing it, and
she’d not been able to put it on in a hurry. She had found only one of her work
shoes, which she held in one hand. The other one was under the bed. Candy
found it and put it on the correct foot—Rose Rose wore no socks. Then
Candy tied the laces for her, too. Rose Rose just sat on the bed while Candy
put on and tied her other shoe.

“You’re coming with me. Your baby, too,” Candy told the girl.
“Yes, ma’am,” Rose Rose said.
Candy took the bathing suit from her and used the suit to wipe the tears from

Rose Rose’s face.

feel better. No one’s going to hurt you.”

she picked her up and handed her to her mother. Rose Rose moved
uncertainly and Candy put her arm around her when they walked out of the
cider house together. “You’re going to be just fine,” Candy said to Rose Rose;
she kissed the young woman on her neck, and Rose Rose, who was sweating,
leaned against her.

but the rest of the men still sat on the roof.

voice; it was not a question.

her baby into the Jeep.

“I was speakin’ to my daughter,” Mr. Rose said with dignity.
But Rose Rose would not answer her father. She sat like a statue of a woman

with a baby in her arms while Candy turned the Jeep around and drove away.
Before they went into the fancy house together, Rose Rose slumped against
Candy and said to her, “I never could do nothin’ about it.”

“Of course you couldn’t,” Candy told her.
“He hated the father of the other one,” Rose Rose said. “He been after me

ever since.”

inside; through the windows, they could watch Wally flying back and forth in
the house.

want me back.”

“He can’t have you,” Candy told her. “He can’t make you go back to him.”
“He make his own rules,” said Rose Rose.
“And the father of your beautiful daughter?” Candy asked, holding the door

open for Rose Rose and her baby girl. “Where is he?”

involved with me no more.”

“And your mother?” Candy asked, as they went in the house.
“She dead,” Rose Rose said.
That was when Wally told Candy that Dr. Larch was dead, too. She would

not have known it to look at Homer, who was all business; an orphan learns
how to hold back, how to keep things in.

around the downstairs of the house and Angel took Rose Rose to his room,
which was prepared for her.

“I’m a little nervous,” Homer admitted to Candy. “It’s certainly not a matter

of technique, and I’ve got everything I need—I know I can do it. It’s just that,
to me, it is a living human being. I can’t describe to you what it feels like—
just to hold the curette, for example. When living tissue is touched, it
responds—somehow,” Homer said, but Candy cut him off.

“It may help you to know who the father is,” she said. “It’s Mister Rose. Her

father is the father—if that makes it any easier.”

The crisply made-up bed in Angel’s childhood room and the gleaming

instruments—which were displayed so neatly on the adjacent bed—made
Rose Rose both talkative and rigid.

“They took the other one out through the top—not the way she was supposed
to come out,” Rose Rose explained. She’d had a Caesarean, Homer Wells
could see, perhaps because of her age and her size at the time. But Homer
could not quite convince her that this time everything would be much easier.
He wouldn’t need to take anything “out through the top.”

ride in the wheelchair. Knock over all the furniture, if you want,” she told
him, kissing her son.

“Yeah, you go away,” Rose Rose told Angel.
“Don’t be afraid,” Candy told Rose Rose. “Homer knows what he’s doing.

while Homer began to show Rose Rose the instruments.

“This is a speculum,” he said to her. “It may feel cold, but it doesn’t hurt.

You won’t feel any of this,” he assured her. “These are dilators,” Homer said,
but Rose Rose shut her eyes.

ready.

and turned her face away from the mask, but Candy put her hands at Rose
Rose’s temples and very gently moved her head into the right position. “The
first smell is the sharpest,” said Homer Wells.

muffled under the mask.

breathe normally.”

began to take her out of her body.

wiggle her toes. Rose Rose was getting her first feel of the sand; the beach
was warm. The tide was coming in; she felt the water around her ankles. “No
big deal,” she murmured. Rose Rose meant the ocean.

cervix, introduced the first dilator until the os opened like an eye looking back
at him. The cervix looked softened and slightly enlarged, and it was bathed in
a healthy, clear mucus—it was the most breathtaking pink color that Homer
had ever seen. Downstairs, he heard the wheelchair careening through the
house—there was a wild and nonstop giggling from Baby Rose.

were his nurse of long-standing and he was used to giving her directions and
she was used to following them, exactly. He did not let the ruckus (or Candy
trying to quiet them down) distract him; he watched the cervix open until it
opened wide enough. He chose the curette of the correct size. After the first
one, thought Homer Wells, this might get easier. Because he knew now that
he couldn’t play God in the worst sense; if he could operate on Rose Rose,
how could he refuse to help a stranger? How could he refuse anyone? Only a
god makes that kind of decision. I’ll just give them what they want, he
thought. An orphan or an abortion.

surprised him. He did not even blink when he felt the curette make contact; he
did not divert his eye from witnessing the miracle.

For that night, Candy slept in the extra bed in Angel’s room—she wanted to
be close by if Rose Rose needed anything, but Rose Rose slept like a rock.
The gap left by her missing tooth made a small whistling noise when her lips
were parted; it was not at all disturbing, and Candy slept quite soundly, too.

quite late, talking. Wally told Angel about the time he first fell in love with
Candy; although Angel had heard the story before, he listened to it more
attentively—now that he thought he had fallen in love with Rose Rose. Wally
also told Angel that he must never underestimate the darker necessities of the
world where his father had grown up.

Cloud’s, but you can’t get Saint Cloud’s out of Homer. And the thing about
being in love,” Wally said to Angel, “is that you can’t force anyone. It’s
natural to want someone you love to do what you want, or what you think
would be good for them, but you have to let everything happen to them. You
can’t interfere with people you love any more than you’re supposed to
interfere with people you don’t even know. And that’s hard,” he added,
“because you often feel like interfering—you want to be the one who makes
the plans.”

pointed out.

them.”

One of his friendly Burmese rescuers was offering to catheterize him. First he
dipped the bamboo shoot in the brown river, then he wiped it dry on one of
the strips of silk that bound up his head basket, then he spat on it. “You want
to pees now?” the Burmese asked Wally.

which made Angel smile before he fell asleep, too.

Upstairs, in the master bedroom, Homer Wells was wide awake. He’d

volunteered to have Baby Rose for the night. “Because I’ll be up all night,
anyway,” he said. He’d forgotten how much he enjoyed having a baby to look
after. Babies reminded Homer of himself; they were always wanting
something in the middle of the night. But after he’d given Baby Rose her
bottle, the child went back to sleep and left Homer Wells alone again; it was
nonetheless a pleasure having the little girl to look at. Her black face in the
bed beside him was no bigger than his hand, and occasionally her hands
would reach up and her fingers would open and close, grasping at something
she saw in her sleep. The presence of another breather in the room reminded

Homer Wells of the sleeping quarters in St. Cloud’s, where he had some
difficulty imagining the necessary announcement.

found a family. Good night, Doctor Larch.” He tried to imagine which one of
them would have said it. He imagined it would have been Nurse Angela, and
so it was to her that he sent the letter.

replacing the old, nonpracticing homosexual was less intense; it did stimulate
her, however, to imagine replacing him with that young missionary who had
antagonized him so. Dr. Gingrich saw some faint justice appear on the
horizon at the thought of replacing Larch with someone who’d clearly driven
the old man crazy, but Dr. Gingrich was not so interested in the outcome of
the situation in St. Cloud’s as he was fascinated with his secretive study of
Mrs. Goodhall’s mind, in which he found such a complex broth of righteous
delusion and inspired hatred.

young Dr. Stone, but Dr. Gingrich was particularly eager to observe Mrs.
Goodhall at such a meeting. Mrs. Goodhall had developed a tic—whenever
someone provided her with unusual pleasure or displeasure, the right side of
her face suffered an involuntary muscular contraction. Dr. Gingrich imagined
that, upon meeting the missionary doctor, Mrs. Goodhall would enter a phase
of nearly constant spasm, and he could not wait to observe this.

your efforts to reach Dr. Stone are hampered by the doctor being in transit
between two of the mission’s hospitals in India. Say Assam is one, say New
Delhi is the other. Say you don’t expect to be able to communicate with him
for a week or more, and that—if he was willing to consider the position at St.
Cloud’s—he couldn’t possibly be available before November.”

Homer Wells hoped that this would allow him the time to tell Angel

everything, and to be finished with the harvest.

addition to being good nurses, and that you’ll be able to recognize the patients
who should be referred to a physician,” Homer wrote to Nurse Angela. “You
must forgive me for needing all this time, but perhaps I will seem more
believable to the board of trustees if everyone has to wait for me. It takes time
to leave Asia.”

and tell him anything that Larch might have omitted—although Homer could
not imagine that St. Larch had left out anything. It was with the shortest
possible sentence that Homer told Nurse Angela that he had loved Larch “like

a father,” and that they had “nothing to fear from Melony.”

Melony, however, but Bob wasn’t smart enough to be afraid of her. When the
cast would come off her arm, and when her nose looked more or less normal
again, Melony and Lorna would cruise the old, familiar spots—the pizza bar
in Bath, among them—and Bob would have the charmless instinct to annoy
them again. Melony would disarm him with her shy smile—the one that
humbly revealed her bad teeth to him—and while Bob turned his oafish
attention to Lorna, Melony snipped off the top half of his ear with her wire-
cutters (the electrician’s common and trusty tool). Then Melony broke several
of Bob’s ribs and his nose and beat him unconscious with a chair. She had her
heart in the right place, regarding St. Cloud’s, but Melony was an eye-for-an-
eye and a tit-for-tat girl.

who had long thought that Homer Wells was made of hero stuff.

in Angel’s room, with Candy bringing her baby to her from time to time, and
Angel visiting with her every chance he could get.

“You’re going to love this room,” Angel told her.
“You plain crazy,” Rose Rose told him. “But I already love it.”
It was a day that hurt the harvest; Mr. Rose wouldn’t pick and half the men

were sore from falling off the bicycles. Homer Wells, who never would
master the terrible machine, had a puffy knee and a bruise between his
shoulder blades the size of a melon. Peaches refused to go up a ladder; he
would load the trailers and pick drops all day. Muddy groaned and
complained; he was the only one among them who had actually learned to
ride. Black Pan announced that it was a good day for a fast.

weak sun, wrapped in a blanket from his bed; he sat Indian-style, not talking
to anyone.

“He say he on a pickin’ strike,” Peaches whispered to Muddy, who told

Homer that he thought Mr. Rose was on a hunger strike, too—“and every
other kind of strike they is.”

“We’ll just have to get along without him,” Homer told the men, but

everyone pussyfooted their way past Mr. Rose, who appeared to have
enthroned himself in front of the cider house.

“Or else he planted hisself, like a tree,” Peaches said.
Black Pan brought him a cup of coffee and some fresh corn bread, but Mr.

Rose wouldn’t touch any of it. Sometimes, he appeared to be gnawing on one
of the pacifiers. It was a cool day, and when the faint sun would drift behind

the clouds, Mr. Rose would draw the blanket over his head; then he sat
cloaked and robed and closed off completely from any of them.

“He like an Indian,” Peaches said. “He don’t make no treaty.”
“He want to see his daughter,” Muddy informed Homer at the end of the

day. “That what he say to me—it all he say. Just see her. He say he won’t
touch her.”

Muddy.

in, and asked him to eat with them—Rose Rose was sitting with them, at the
table—but Muddy was too nervous to stay. “He say he won’t come here,”
Muddy told Homer. “He say for her to come to the cider house. He say to tell
you they got they own rules. He say you breakin’ the rules, Homer.”

Rose Rose sat so still at the table that she was not even chewing; she wanted

to be sure to hear everything Muddy was saying. Angel tried to take her hand,
which was cold, but she pulled it away from him and kept both her hands
wound up in her napkin, in her lap.

and that in my house we follow my rules. You tell him he’s welcome to come
here anytime.”

“He won’t do it,” Muddy said.
“I have to go see him,” Rose Rose said.
“No, you don’t,” Candy told her. “You tell him he sees her here, or nowhere,

Muddy,” Candy said.

little banged up.” Angel went outside to look at the bicycles, and that’s when
Muddy handed him the knife.

Rose. You say I want her to have it. Just so she have one.”

Angel looked at Muddy’s knife; it was a bone-handled jackknife, and part of

the bone was chipped. It was one of those jackknives where the blade locks in
place when you open it so it can’t close on your fingers. The blade was almost
six inches long, which would make it prominent in anyone’s pocket, and over
the years it had seen a lot of whetstone; the blade was ground down very thin
and the edge was very sharp.

“Don’t you need it, Muddy?” Angel asked him.
“I never knew what to do with it,” Muddy confessed. “I just get in trouble

with it.”

“I’ll give it to her,” Angel said.
“You tell her her father say he love her, and he just wanna see her,” Muddy

said. “Just see,” he repeated.

Muddy.”

love Rose Rose—that part of her problem.”

her your knife?”

“Just so she have one,” Muddy repeated.
Angel gave her the knife when they were sitting in his room after supper.
“It’s from Muddy,” he told her.
“I know who it from,” Rose Rose said. “I know what knife everyone got—I

know what they all look like.” Although it was not a switchblade, it made
Angel jump to see how quickly she opened the knife using only one hand.
“Look what Muddy do,” she said, laughing. “He been sharpenin’ it to death—
he wore it half away.” She closed the knife against her hip; her long fingers
moved the knife around so quickly that Angel didn’t notice where she put it.

“You know a lot about knives?” Angel asked her.
“From my father,” she said. “He show me everythin’.”
Angel moved and sat on the bed next to her, but Rose Rose regarded him

neutrally. “I told you,” she began patiently. “You don’t wanna have no
business with me—I could never tell you nothin’ about me. You don’t wanna
know ’bout me, believe me.”

“But I love you,” Angel pleaded with her.
After she kissed him—and she allowed him to touch her breasts—she said,

“Angel. Lovin’ someone don’t always make no difference.”

“You know what I namin’ her?” she asked Angel. “Candy,” Rose Rose said.
“That who she is—she a Candy.”

but no one got up earlier than Rose Rose. Angel, who had more or less been
imagining that he was guarding the house all night, noticed that Rose Rose
and her daughter had gone. Angel and Homer got in the Jeep and drove out to
the cider house before breakfast—but there was nowhere they could go that
morning that Rose Rose hadn’t been to ahead of them. The men were up and
looking restless, and Mr. Rose was already maintaining his stoical sitting
position in the grass in front of the cider house—the blanket completely
covering him, except for his face.

“You too late,” Mr. Rose said to them. “She long gone.”
Angel ran and looked in the cider house, but there was no sign of Rose Rose

or her daughter.

made the hitchhiking sign—his bare hand emerging from the blanket only for
a second before it went back into hiding.

“I just love her, was all. I just wanna see her—one more time.”

to find Muddy.

tell your dad he a hero, and that you was the nicest.”

“She didn’t say where she was going?”
“She don’t know where she goin’, Angel,” Muddy told him. “She just know

she gotta go.”

“But she could have stayed with us!” Angel said. “With me,” he added.
“I know she thought about it,” Muddy said. “You better think about it, too.”
“I have thought about it—I think about it all the time,” Angel said angrily.
“I don’t think you old enough to think about it, Angel,” Muddy said gently.
“I loved her!” the boy said.
“She know,” Muddy said. “She know who she is, too, but she also know you

don’t know who you is, yet.”

and Candy would drive south along the coast for an hour; then they would
drive north, for two. They knew that even Rose Rose would know enough
about Maine not to go inland. And they knew that a young black woman with
a baby in her arms would be quite exotic among the hitchhikers of Maine; she
certainly would have less trouble than Melony getting a ride—and Melony
always got rides.

lunch without moving, but in the afternoon he asked Black Pan to bring him
some water, and when the men were through picking that day, he called
Muddy over to him. Muddy was very frightened, but he approached Mr. Rose
and stood at a distance of about six feet from him.

“Where your knife, Muddy?” Mr. Rose asked him. “You lose it?”
“I didn’t lose it,” Muddy told him. “But I can’t find it,” he added.
“It around, you mean?” Mr. Rose asked him. “It around somewhere, but you

don’t know where.”

“I don’t know where it is,” Muddy admitted.
“Never do you no good, anyway—do it?” Mr. Rose asked him.
“I never could use it,” Muddy admitted. It was a cold and sunless late

afternoon, but Muddy was sweating; he held his hands at his sides as if his
hands were dead fish.

“Where she get the knife, Muddy?” Mr. Rose asked.
“What knife?” Muddy asked him.
“It look like your knife—what I seen of it,” said Mr. Rose.
“I gave it to her,” Muddy admitted.
“Thank you for doin’ that, Muddy,” Mr. Rose said. “If she gone with her

thumb, I glad she got a knife with her.”

“Peaches!” Muddy screamed. “Go get Homer!” Peaches came out of the

cider house and stared at Mr. Rose, who didn’t move a muscle; Mr. Rose
didn’t look at Peaches at all. “Black Pan!” Muddy screamed, as Peaches went
running off to get Homer Wells. Black Pan came out of the cider house and he
and Muddy got down on their knees and peered at Mr. Rose together.

“No one gonna catch her now. She had all day to get away,” Mr. Rose said
proudly.

dared to poke around under the blanket. They just watched Mr. Rose’s eyes
and his dry lips.

said to Muddy.

“I know she good,” Muddy said.
“She almost the best,” said Mr. Rose. “And who taught her?” he asked them.
“You did,” they told him.
“That right,” said Mr. Rose. “That why she almost as good as me.” Very

slowly, without exposing any of himself—keeping himself completely under
the blanket, except for his face—Mr. Rose rolled over on his side and tucked
his knees up to his chest. “I real tired of sittin’ up,” he told Muddy and Black
Pan. “I gettin’ sleepy.”

“Where she get you?” Muddy asked him again.
“I didn’t think it would take this long,” said Mr. Rose. “It taken all day, but

it felt like it was gonna go pretty fast.”

All the men were standing around him when Homer Wells and Peaches

arrived in the Jeep. Mr. Rose had very little left to say when Homer got to
him.

you know how I feel.”

“I know how you feel,” said Homer Wells.
“Right,” said Mr. Rose—grinning.
The knife had entered in the upper right quadrant, close to the rib margin.

rate—for many hours. Mr. Rose might have stopped bleeding several times,
and started again. In most cases, a liver stab wound hemorrhages very slowly.

house, but long after his daughter had made good her escape. Mr. Rose had
managed to soak the blade of his own knife in his wound, and the last thing he
told Homer was that it should be clear to the authorities that he had stabbed
himself. If he hadn’t meant to kill himself, why would he have let himself
bleed to death from what wasn’t necessarily a mortal wound?

stuck myself. You better say that what happen. Let me hear you say it!” he
raised his voice to them.

“That what happen,” Muddy said.
“You kill yourself,” Peaches told him.
“That what happen,” Black Pan said.
“You hearin’ this right, Homer?” Mr. Rose asked him.
That was how Homer reported it, and that was how the death of Mr. Rose

was received—the way he wanted it, according to the cider house rules. Rose
Rose had broken the rules, of course, but everyone at Ocean View knew the
rules Mr. Rose had broken with her.

from the ocean, the overhead bulb that hung in the cider house kitchen
blinked twice and burned out; the spatter of apple mash on the far wall, near
the press and grinder, was cast so somberly in shadows that the dark clots of
pomace looked like black leaves that had blown indoors and stuck against the
wall in a storm.

the bonus checks—and Angel had come with him to say good-bye to Muddy
and Peaches and Black Pan and the rest of them. Wally had made some
arrangements with Black Pan to be crew boss the following year. Wally had
been right about Mr. Rose being the only one of them who could read well
and write at all. Muddy told Angel that he’d always thought the list of rules
tacked to the kitchen wall was something to do with the building’s electricity.

“ ’Cause it was always near the light switch,” Muddy explained. “I thought

they was instructions ’bout the lights.”

The other men, since they couldn’t read at all, never noticed that the list was

there.

good-bye.

“I won’t see her, Angel,” Muddy told the boy. “She long gone.”
Then they were all long gone. Angel would never see Muddy again, either—

or Peaches, or any of the rest of them except Black Pan. It wouldn’t work out,
having Black Pan as a crew boss, as Wally would discover; the man was a
cook, not a picker, and a boss had to be in the field with the men. Although
Black Pan would gather a fair picking crew together, he was never quite in
charge of them—in future years, of course, no one would ever be as in charge
of a picking crew at Ocean View as Mr. Rose had been. For a while, Wally
would try hiring French Canadians; they were, after all, closer to Maine than
the Carolinas. But the French Canadian crews were often ill-tempered and
alcoholic, and Wally would always be trying to get the French Canadians out
of jail.

small children. The pregnant women on the ladders made everyone nervous.
They left something cooking all day, and started a small fire in the kitchen.
And when the men ran the press, they allowed their children to splash about
in the vat.

and good workers. They brought with them an interesting music and a
straightforward but contained passion for beer (and for a little marijuana).
They knew how to handle the fruit and they never hurt each other.

were—would never sit on the cider house roof. It just never occurred to them.
And no one would ever put up a list of rules again.

In future years, the only person who ever sat on the cider house roof was

Angel Wells, who would do it because he liked that particular view of the
ocean, and because he wanted to remember that November day in 195_, after
Muddy and the rest of them had left, and his father turned to him (they were
alone at the cider house) and said, “How about sitting on the roof for a while
with me? It’s time you knew the whole story.”

“Another little story?” Angel asked.
“I said the whole story,” said Homer Wells.
And although it was a cold day, that November, and the wind off the sea was

briny and raw, father and son sat on that roof a long time. It was, after all, a
long story, and Angel would ask a lot of questions.

worried about how cold they must be. But she didn’t interrupt them; she just
kept driving. She hoped the truth would keep them warm. She drove to the
barn nearest the apple mart and got Everett Taft to help her put the canvas
canopy on the Jeep. Then she went and got Wally out of the office.

said, when she didn’t answer him.

everything else belonging to Ray, had been blown over land and sea; he kept
quiet. The ugly little carhop restaurant that Bucky Bean had manufactured
was closed for the season; they were alone. Candy drove the Jeep through the
empty parking lot and out to a rocky embankment that served as a seawall
against the waves in Heart’s Haven Harbor. She stopped as near to the ocean’s
edge as she dared to, near the old pilings of what had been her father’s dock
—where she and Wally had spent so many evenings, so long ago.

yards, over the rocks and the sand, and sat him down on a relatively smooth
and flat shelf of the jagged coastline. She wrapped Wally’s legs in the blanket
and then she sat down behind him and straddled him with her legs—as a way
of keeping them both warm. They sat facing Europe in this position, like
riders on a sled about to plunge downhill.

“This is fun,” Wally said. She stuck her chin over his shoulder; their cheeks

were touching; she hugged him around his arms and his chest, and she
squeezed his withered hips with her legs.

“I love you, Wally,” Candy said, beginning her story.

In late November, in the mousing season, the board of trustees at St. Cloud’s
approved the appointment of Dr. F. Stone as obstetrician-in-residence and the
new director of the orphanage—having met the zealous missionary in the
board’s chambers in Portland, the birthplace of the late Wilbur Larch. Dr.
Stone, who appeared a little tired from his Asian journeying and from what he
described as “a touch of something dysenteric,” made the correct impression
on the board. His manner was somber, his hair was graying and cropped in an
almost military fashion (“Hindu barbers,” he apologized, showing a mild
sense of humor; actually, Candy had cut his hair). Homer Wells was carelessly
shaven, clean but tousled in his dress—both at ease and impatient with
strangers, in the manner (the board thought) of a man with urgent business
who was not in the least vain about his appearance; he hadn’t the time. The
board also approved of Dr. Stone’s medical and religious credentials—the
latter, in the estimation of the devout Mrs. Goodhall, would give to Dr.
Stone’s authority in St. Cloud’s a “balance” that she noted had been missing
in Dr. Larch.

Dr. Gingrich was excited to note the contortions registered on Mrs.

Goodhall’s face during the entire meeting with young Dr. Stone, who did not
recognize Gingrich and Goodhall from his brief glimpse of them in the off-
season, Ogunquit hotel. Dr. Gingrich found a comforting familiarity in the

young man’s face, although he would never associate the glow of a
missionary with the sorrowful longing he had seen on the face of the lover.
Perhaps Mrs. Goodhall’s tic affected her vision—she did not recognize the
young man from the hotel, either—or else her mind would never grasp the
possibility that a man devoted to children could also be a man with a
practicing sexual life.

to remember; the peevish miseries compounded in their expressions were not
unique. And the way that Homer looked when he was with Candy was not the
way he looked most of the time.

conviction he held: that they should be legalized, and that he intended to work
through the proper channels toward that end. However, Dr. Stone assured
them, as long as abortions were illegal, he would rigorously uphold the law.
He believed in rules, and in obeying them, he told the board. They liked the
hardship and self-sacrifice that they imagined they could witness in the
wrinkles around his dark eyes—and how the fierce Asian sun had blistered
his nose and cheeks while he had toiled to save the diarrhetic children.
(Actually, he had deliberately sat for too long in front of Candy’s sunlamp.)
And—on the religious grounds more comfortable to the board, and to Mrs.
Goodhall especially—Dr. Stone said that he himself never would perform
abortions, even if they were legalized. “I just couldn’t do it,” he lied calmly. If
it ever was legal, of course, he would simply refer the unfortunate woman “to
one of those doctors who could, and would.” It was clear that Dr. Stone found
“those doctors” not to his liking—that, despite his loyalty to Dr. Larch, Dr.
Stone found that particular practice of Larch’s to be an act decidedly against
nature.

It was in large measure indicative of Dr. Stone’s “Christian tolerance” that

despite his long-standing disagreement with Dr. Larch on this delicate subject,
the young missionary was forgiving of Larch—far more forgiving than the
board, by no small portion. “I always prayed for him,” Dr. Stone said of Dr.
Larch, his eyes shining. “I still pray for him.” It was an emotional moment,
perhaps influenced by the aforementioned “touch of something dysenteric”—
and the board was predictably moved by it. Mrs. Goodhall’s tic went wild.

board that the young woman’s fervor to do the right thing had simply been—
in her youth—misguided. He would tell her a few things about the
Communist guerrilla activity in Burma that would open her eyes. And Dr.
Stone convinced the board that the older nurses, and Mrs. Grogan, had a few
more years of good service in them. “It’s all a matter of guidance,” Dr. Stone

told the board. Now there was a word that pleased Dr. Gingrich!

Dr. Stone opened his hands; they were rather roughly callused for the hands

of a doctor, Mrs. Goodhall would observe—thinking it charming how this
healer of children must have helped with building the huts or planting the
gardens or whatever other rough work there’d been to do over there. When he
said “guidance,” Homer Wells opened his hands the way a minister received a
congregation, thought the board; or the way a good doctor received the
precious head of a newborn child, they thought.

he was leaving them. And how he salaamed to them!

“Nga sak kin,” said the missionary doctor.
Oh, what had he said? they all wanted to know. Wally, of course, had taught

Homer the correct pronunciation—it being one of the few Burmese things that
Wally had ever heard correctly, although he’d never learned what it meant.

was someone’s name. “It means,” Homer told the enraptured board: “May
God watch over your soul, which no man may abuse.”

a short phrase!”

he told them again. He got them all to repeat it after him. He was pleased to
imagine them, later, giving this meaningless blessing to each other. It would
have pleased him more if he’d ever known what the phrase actually meant. It
was the perfect thing for a board of trustees to go around saying to each other:
“curried fish balls.”

they were eating a late supper in the house at Ocean View.

believe that you can get away with anything.”

Upstairs, after supper, Angel watched his father pack the old black doctor’s

bag—and some other bags, as well.

“Don’t worry, Pop,” Angel told his father. “You’re going to do just fine.”
“You’re going to do just fine, too,” Homer told his son. “I’m not worried

about that.” Downstairs they heard Candy pushing Wally around in the
wheelchair. They were playing the game that Wally and Angel often played—
the game Wally called “flying.”

“Come on,” Wally was saying. “Angel can make it go faster.”
Candy was laughing. “I’m going as fast as I can,” Candy said.
“Please stop thinking about the furniture,” Wally told her.
“Please look after Wally,” Homer said to Angel. “And mind your mother,”

he told his son.

“Right,” said Angel Wells.

In the constantly changing weather of Maine, especially on cloudy days, the
presence of St. Cloud’s could be felt in Heart’s Rock; with a heavy certainty,
the air of St. Cloud’s could be distinguished in the trapped stillness that
hovered above the water of Drinkwater Lake (like those water bugs, those
water walkers, that were nearly constant there). And even in the fog that
rolled over those bright, coastal lawns of Heart’s Haven’s well-to-do, there
was sometimes in the storm-coming air that leaden, heart-sinking feeling that
was the essence of the air of St. Cloud’s.

Candy and Wally and Angel would go to St. Cloud’s for Christmas, and for

the longer of Angel’s school vacations, too; and after Angel had his driver’s
license, he was free to visit his father as often as he liked, which was often.

But when Homer Wells went to St. Cloud’s—even though Wally had offered

him a car—Homer took the train. Homer knew he wouldn’t need a car there,
and he wanted to arrive the way most of his patients did; he wanted to get the
feel of it.

In late November, there was already snow as the train moved north and

inland, and by the time the train reached St. Cloud’s, the blue-cold snow was
deeply on the ground and heavily bent the trees. The stationmaster, who hated
to leave the television, was shoveling snow off the platform when the train
pulled in. The stationmaster thought he recognized Homer Wells, but the
stern, black doctor’s bag and the new beard fooled him. Homer had started the
beard because it had hurt to shave (after he’d burned his face with the
sunlamp), and once the beard had grown for a while, he thought the charge
would be suitable. Didn’t a beard go with his new name?

“Doctor Stone,” Homer said to the stationmaster, introducing himself.

“Fuzzy Stone,” he said. “I used to be an orphan here. Now I’m the new
doctor.”

“Oh, I thought you was familiar!” the stationmaster said, bowing as he

shook Homer’s hand.

Only one other passenger had gotten off the train in St. Cloud’s, and Homer

Wells had no difficulty imagining what she wanted. She was a thin young
woman in a long muskrat coat with a scarf, and a ski hat pulled almost over
her eyes, and she hung back on the platform, waiting for Homer to move
away from the stationmaster. It was the doctor’s bag that had caught her
attention, and after Homer had arranged for the usual louts to tote his heavier
luggage, he started up the hill to the orphanage carrying just the doctor’s bag;
the young woman followed him.

behind, until they almost reached the girls’ division. Then Homer stopped
walking and waited for her.

“Is this the way to the orphanage?” the young woman asked him.
“Right,” said Homer Wells. Since he had grown the beard, he tended to

oversmile at people; he imagined that the beard made it hard for people to tell
whether he was smiling.

both their boots—and, warily, at the doctor’s bag.

toward the hospital entrance of the boys’ division. “May I help you?” he
asked her.

him. Nurse Angela threw her arms around his neck and whispered in his ear.
“Oh Homer!” she whispered. “I knew you’d be back!”

(like Rose Rose) was long gone.

need more than a few operations and a few deliveries to convince her that he
was the real thing. Dr. Stone, even as a name, would be a fitting successor to
Dr. Larch. For wasn’t Stone a good, hard, feet-on-the-ground, reliable-
sounding sort of name for a physician?

And Mrs. Grogan would remark that she had not enjoyed being read aloud

to so much since those hard-to-remember days of Homer Wells. And it was to
everyone’s relief that Fuzzy Stone would exhibit as few symptoms of his
former respiratory difficulties as Homer Wells had exhibited signs of a weak
and damaged heart.

farming. Wally would serve two terms as president of the Maine Horticultural
Society; Candy would serve a term as director of the New York–New England
Apple Institute. And Angel Wells, whom Rose Rose had introduced to love
and to imagination, would one day be a novelist.

“The kid’s got fiction in his blood,” Wally would tell Homer Wells.
To Candy, a novelist was also what Homer Wells had become—for a

novelist, in Candy’s opinion, was also a kind of impostor doctor, but a good
doctor nonetheless.

Homer never minded giving up his name—it wasn’t his actual name, to

begin with—and it was as easy to be a Fuzzy as it was to be a Homer—as
easy (or as hard) to be a Stone as it was to be anything else.

When he was tired or plagued with insomnia (or both), he would miss

Angel, or he would think of Candy. Sometimes he longed to carry Wally into
the surf, or to fly with him. Some nights Homer imagined he would be caught,
or he worried about what he would do when Nurse Angela and Nurse Edna
were too old for the Lord’s work, and for all the other work in St. Cloud’s.
And how would he ever replace Mrs. Grogan? Sometimes, when he was
especially tired, he dreamed that abortions were legal—that they were safe
and available, and therefore he could stop performing them (because someone
else would do them)—but he was rarely that tired.

socialist; or, at least, that he’d become sympathetic to socialist views. Candy
understood by this confession that Homer was sleeping with Nurse Caroline,
which she also understood would be good for them—that is, this new
development was good for Homer and for Nurse Caroline, and it was good for
Candy, too.

Homer Wells saw no end to the insights he perceived nightly, in his

continuous reading from Jane Eyre, and from David Copperfield and Great
Expectations. He would smile to remember how he had once thought Dickens
was “better than” Brontë. When they both gave such huge entertainment and
instruction, what did it matter? he thought—and from where comes this
childish business of “better”? If not entertainment, he took continued
instruction from Gray’s Anatomy.

came unordered to him. “As if from God,” Mrs. Grogan would say.

station, addressed to Dr. Stone. It was from the hospital in Bath—which had
been Dr. Larch’s long-standing source for bodies, in the days when he’d
ordered them. It was some mistake, Homer Wells was sure, but he went to the
railroad station to view the body anyway—and to spare the stationmaster any
unnecessary agitation.

such a long time that the stationmaster grew even more anxious. “I’d just as
soon you either take it up the hill, or send it back,” the stationmaster said, but
Homer Wells waved the fool off; he wanted peace to look at Melony.

She had requested this use of her body, Lorna had told the pathologist at the

Bath hospital. Melony had seen a photograph in the Bath paper, together with
an article revealing Dr. Stone’s appointment in St. Cloud’s. In the event of her
death (which was caused by an electrical accident), Melony had instructed
Lorna to send her body to Dr. Stone in St. Cloud’s. “I might be of some use to
him, finally,” she had told her friend. Of course Homer remembered how
Melony had been jealous of Clara.

inform him that Melony was “a relatively happy woman at the time of her
accident”; in Lorna’s opinion, something to do with how relaxed Melony had
become was responsible for her electrocuting herself. “She was a
daydreamer,” Lorna would write. Homer knew that all orphans were
daydreamers. “You was her hero, finally,” Lorna would tell him.

course; he would send to Bath for another cadaver. Melony had been used
enough.

“Should I send it back, Doctor?” the stationmaster whispered.
“No, she belongs here,” Homer Wells told him, and so he had Melony

brought uphill. It would be essential to keep the sight of her in her present
form a secret from Mrs. Grogan. What Homer told them all was that Melony
had requested she be buried in St. Cloud’s, and so she was—on the hill, under
the apple trees, where it was torturously hard to dig a correct hole (the root
systems of the trees were everywhere). Finally, a large and deep enough hole
was managed, although it was back-breaking labor, and Nurse Caroline said,
“I don’t know who she is, but she sure is difficult.”

“She was always that,” said Homer Wells.
(“Here in St. Cloud’s,” Wilbur Larch had written, “we learn to love the

difficult.”)

Mrs. Grogan said her Cardinal Newman over Melony’s grave, and Homer

said his own prayer (to himself) about her. He had always expected much
from Melony, but she had provided him with more than he’d ever expected—
she had truly educated him, she had shown him the light. She was more
Sunshine than he ever was, he thought. (“Let us be happy for Melony,” he
said to himself. “Melony has found a family.”)

of) A Brief History of St. Cloud’s. In this pursuit, he would have Nurse
Angela’s and Nurse Edna’s and Mrs. Grogan’s and Nurse Caroline’s tireless
company, for by this pursuit they would keep Wilbur Larch alive.

Not that everything was clear to Homer: the later entries in A Brief History

of St. Cloud’s were marred by shorthand inspirations and the whimsy
conveyed to Larch through ether. For example, what did Larch mean by
“rhymes with screams!”? And it seemed uncharacteristically harsh of Larch to
have written: “I put the pony’s penis in her mouth! I contributed to that!”
How could he have thought that? Homer wondered, because Homer never
knew how well Dr. Larch had known Mrs. Eames’s daughter.

And as he grew older, Homer Wells (alias Fuzzy Stone) would take special

Larch.

were Wilbur Larch’s last words: “There is absolutely nothing wrong with
Homer’s heart.” Except for the ether, Homer Wells knew there had been very
little that was wrong with the heart of Wilbur Larch.

had in her wisdom named both Homer Wells and Fuzzy Stone), there was no
fault to be found in the hearts of either Dr. Stone or Dr. Larch, who were—if
there ever were—Princes of Maine, Kings of New England.

Author’s Notes

The pagination of this electronic edition does not match the edition from
which it was created. To locate a specific passage, please use your ebook
reader’s search tools.
 
(pp. 37–38) Anthony Trollope, who visited Portland, Maine, in 1861, and
wrote about it in his North America, was mistaken—in the manner of Wilbur
Larch’s father—about the intended future of the Great Eastern.

(p. 41) I am indebted to my grandfather Dr. Frederick C. Irving for this

information regarding Dr. Ernst, the curve-ball pitcher—and for the
particularly medical language in this chapter. My grandfather’s books include
The Expectant Mother’s Handbook, A Textbook of Obstetrics, and Safe
Deliverance. Dr. Ernst’s studies of bacterial infections drew the attention of a
Dr. Richardson of the Boston Lying-In Hospital, the maternity hospital where
Wilbur Larch served an internship and later joined the staff. Dr. Richardson’s
article “The Use of Antiseptics in Obstetric Practice” would surely have
caught the attention of that eager student of bacteriology, clap-sufferer Wilbur
Larch.

The interest in antiseptics among obstetricians was due to their effect in

preventing the most deadly puerperal infection of that day, childbed fever. In
188_, in some maternity hospitals, the death rate among the mothers was
about one in eight. In 189_, when Wilbur Larch was still at the Boston Lying-
In, a mother’s odds were better; the doctors and their patients were washed
with a solution of bichloride of mercury. Before Larch would leave the
Boston Lying-In, he would see the antiseptic technique advance to the aseptic
—the latter meaning “free from bacteria,” which meant that everything was
sterilized (the sheets, the towels, the gowns, the gauze sponges); the

instruments were boiled.

Sherwin B. Nuland that surgical anesthesia began at Massachusetts General
Hospital on October 16, 1846, when William Morton demonstrated the
effectiveness of ether. Dr. Nuland writes: “Everything that led up to it was
prologue, everything that was tangential to it was byplay, and everything that
followed it was amplification.”

inhalation agents known. At a concentration of only 1 to 2 percent it is a light,
tasty vapor; in light concentration, even thirty years ago, hundreds of cases of
cardiac surgery were done with light ether and partially awake (even talking)
patients.

oxide or chloroform, but Larch developed his preference for ether through
self-administration. Someone would be crazy to self-administer chloroform. It
is twenty-five times more toxic to heart muscle than is ether and has an
extremely narrow margin of safety; a minimal overdose can result in cardiac
irregularity and death.

Nitrous oxide requires a very high (at least 80 percent) concentration to do

the job and is always accompanied by a degree of what is called hypoxia—
insufficient oxygen. It requires careful monitoring and cumbersome
apparatus, and the patient runs the risk of bizarre fantasies or giggling fits.
Induction is very fast.

Ether is a perfect drug addiction for a conservative.
(pp. 42–44) The source of this story is, again, my grandfather, who

graduated from Harvard Medical School in 1910. He became chief of staff of
the Boston Lying-In Hospital and was William Lambert Richardson Professor
of Obstetrics at Harvard for a number of years. I remember him as a good
storyteller and an occasional bully—of the other members of his family. As a
young doctor, he had many experiences delivering babies to Boston’s poorer
immigrant families, and to read him is to understand that he had as many
opinions and prejudices as he had experiences and talents.

Prussian botanist. People have been having ether frolics—and later, laughing-
gas parties—ever since. In 1819, John Dalton published his study of the
compound’s physical and chemical properties. Coleridge was a laughing-gas
man—a party sniffer, and a frequenter of the experiments with nitrous oxide
conducted by Humphrey Davy. The poet was certainly familiar with ether; it
was a pity—for him—that he apparently preferred opium.

abdominal incision is small because the uterus is opened inside the abdominal
cavity. But in Dr. Larch’s days at the Boston Lying-In, in 188_ and 189_, the
incision made in the abdominal wall was nearly a foot long; the uterus was
lifted through the incision and placed upon the patient’s abdomen. “The
slashing of this great, plum-colored organ produced a dramatic gush of liquid
and blood,” my grandfather wrote. The uterus was then sutured with silk and
returned to the abdominal cavity; the abdomen was closed in the same way.
Considerably more discomfort followed such an operation than follows a
Caesarean section now. The operation, in Larch’s time—and without
complications—would require nearly an hour.

of Ellen Bean,” as told by my grandfather. “A spinster of thirty-five years and
of New England stock,” Grandfather wrote of Ms. Bean, whose condition
(and cause of death) was the same fate I awarded to the unfortunate Mrs.
Eames. As my grandfather wrote: “The pregnant state does not engender in all
women the rapturous joy traditionally associated with this condition; indeed
there are some who view their future with a sour visage and a jaundiced eye.
This much may be assumed from the case of Ellen Bean.”

abortion was punishable by a year in jail or a one-thousand-dollar fine, or
both—and, if you were a doctor, you might lose your license to practice. The
Eastman-Everett Act of 1840 described the attempted abortion of any woman
with child as an offense, “whether such child be quick or not”—and
regardless of the method.

solution, although it’s likely he would have learned more about its uses during
his short visit to France in World War I. That is where my grandfather learned
of the many uses of Dakin’s solution and where he learned how to débride—
that is, to cut away all the devitalized tissue surrounding a wound; the French
were good teachers of this, he said.

“remindful of Mahler’s Kindertotenlieder,” he would have to be gifted with a
little precognition; Mahler’s song cycle was written in 1902. That is implied
in the line, “Of course they could not have been singing Mahler’s Songs on
the Death of Children, but those were the songs Wilbur Larch had heard.”

patient, an extremely small woman named Edith Fletcher—upon whom a
Caesarean section was performed (Boston Lying-In Hospital; July 13, 1894).
A pelvis this small is rare.

(p. 59) Mrs. W. H. Maxwell’s A Female Physician to the Ladies of the

United States: Being a Familiar and Practical Treatise of Matter of Utmost
Importance Peculiar to Women (“Adapted to Every Woman’s Own Private
Use”) was published in New York in 1860. Mrs. Maxwell treated “all diseases
peculiar to women, or which they may have unfortunately incurred through
the dissipations or wanton unfaithfulness of husbands, or otherwise.” (In
short, she treated venereal diseases.) Mrs. Maxwell also wrote that she gave
her attention, as well, “to women . . . who are forced by the malfunction of
their genital organs, or other cause, to resort to premature delivery.” (In short,
she performed abortions.)

Baldwin Place Home for Little Wanderers; the charter was granted by the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts in 1865. The name was changed to The
New England Home for Little Wanderers, its present name, in 1889—more
than a decade before Wilbur Larch founded the orphanage in St. Cloud’s.

time), the term D and C is used. I think it’s safe to assume that the term was in
common use in 192_.

France in World War I as a “navigational chart.”

(p. 112) This is the exact description of a D and C as viewed by Dr. Richard

Selzer (Yale School of Medicine), a general surgeon and author (Mortal
Lessons: Notes on the Art of Surgery and Rituals of Surgery are among his
books). I’m grateful for his reading of the manuscript of this novel and his
generous advice—especially his introducing me to Dr. Nuland, who was the
overseer of all the medical aspects of this novel.

manifestations of Alzheimer’s disease is The Journal of the History of
Medicine and Allied Sciences, Volume XXXIV, Number 3, July 1979: the
article by Dr. Sherwin B. Nuland, “The Enigma of Semmelweis—An
Interpretation.” Dr. Nuland first presented his material in a lecture at the Yale
School of Medicine (the annual History of Surgery Series). His thesis is that
Ignac Semmelweis, the tortured discoverer of the sources of puerperal fever,
suffered from Alzheimer’s disease and not from neurosyphilis; furthermore,
Dr. Nuland believes that Semmelweis died of injuries received in a mental
institution—i.e., he was beaten to death by his keepers. The records of
Bedlam and of other institutions for the insane show that this was common as
late as the early part of this century, and occasional reports still appear.

patient is my grandfather’s book Safe Deliverance—the chapter on puerperal
convulsions. Grandfather examines the case of a Lucy Nickerson, who died in

1880 of an eclamptic condition that was further aggravated by a forced
delivery—the only method known to physicians of the unfortunate Mrs.
Nickerson’s day.

C. Irving (he was called Fritz). Grandfather describes this as the correct and
life-saving treatment given to one Mrs. Mary O’Toole in 1937.

(p. 130) As of 1942, these are my grandfather’s findings. Syphilis—

although a great source of agitation to the public-health officials of the day—
afflicted only 2 percent of the pregnant women of Boston. The incidence of
eclamptic convulsions was much higher. The disease developed in 8 percent
of the country’s childbearing women.

boards; the first press wouldn’t be until September, when you’d be pressing
the early McIntoshes and the Gravensteins. The press boards, or racks, are
wooden slats, over which the cider cloths (or press cloths) are folded. The
press boards—they are stacked seven-high—take quite a beating, and the wax
protects them. The mash, which is also called the pomace, is squeezed
between these boards under a pressure of two thousand pounds. It takes eight
hours to squeeze a thousand gallons of cider out of the press—about three
gallons per bushel of apples.

The reason you wax the press boards before the first press is that you don’t

want to take the time to do it once the harvest has begun. And you’re running
the cider mill during the harvest maybe as much as every other night, and
every day that it rains—when you can’t pick apples. In the 1940s and the
1950s, the last good press would have come in January.

Jean, for this and other apple-farming information. The Wagners run the
Applecrest Farm Orchards in Hampton Falls, New Hampshire, where I
worked when I was a boy; Jean and her late husband, Bill, gave me my first
job.

name their buildings. This is necessary for the shorthand language of simple
directions, as in: “The Deere has a flat and needs fixing in the Frying Pan”;
or, “I left the Dodge in Number Two because Wally is spraying in the Sanborn
and he’ll need a ride back.” In the orchard where I worked, there was a
building called Number Two—although there was no Number Three and I
don’t remember a Number One. Many of the orchards were named after the
families who’d been the original homesteaders on that particular piece of land
(Brown, Eaton, Coburn, and Curtis are some local names I remember). There
was an orchard called Twenty Acres and another one called Nineteen, and

there were the plainer names—an orchard called the Field, one called the
Fountain, one called the Spring, and one called Old-New (because it was half
old trees and half newly planted). The Frying Pan is also called Frying Pan—
without the article.

breeze in Iowa (if one was blowing).

(Cardinal) Newman, the English theologian and author (1801–90); I’m told
that the prayer was originally part of one of Cardinal Newman’s sermons. It
was also what served my family as a family prayer and was spoken at the
graveside of my maternal grandmother—it was her favorite. Her name was
Helen Bates Winslow, and she died just a month short of her hundredth
birthday; the festivities the family had planned for that event would
doubtlessly have killed my grandmother, had she lived until then. Cardinal
Newman’s prayer must be a very good one, or at least it worked very well—
and for a very long time—for my grandmother, who was devoted to it. I was
devoted to her.

in 1907. “Deterioration in cognition” occurs relatively early in the disease and
is marked by a disturbance of recent memory and a loss of the ability to learn
new things. Dr. Nuland of Yale also states that some patients are more likely
to begin with personality changes and some with intellectual changes. The
advance of the disease, in either case, is marked by a lowering threshold of
frustration. Dr. Nuland notes that the sequence in which certain small jobs
need to be done would be difficult to follow and that complex ideas are hard
to comprehend and impossible to explain to others. It is a rapid deterioration
that advances in Alzheimer victims: the average life-span, from the time of
diagnosis, is approximately seven years; there are patients who live much
longer, and many who die within a few months. In recent years, it has been
recognized that Alzheimer’s is not only an uncommon disease that affects
people in midlife, but also a relatively frequent cause of mental and physical
degeneration in the elderly—many of whom were previously thought to have
simple hardening of the arteries (arteriosclerosis).

collected seventeen hundred examples of the limerick. This limerick, which is
categorized as an “organ limerick,” originated in print in 1939; it may have
been in spoken circulation earlier. In 194_, when Senior and Wally are saying
it to each other, it would have been only a few years old.

clear, no-nonsense writer; his book, which he calls “an elementary laboratory
textbook in mammalian anatomy,” employs the anatomy of the rabbit as an
introduction to an understanding of human anatomy. Bensley’s is not Gray’s,
but Practical Anatomy of the Rabbit is a good book of its kind. As a very
“elementary” student of anatomy, I learned a lot from Bensley—his book
made reading Gray’s much easier for me.

similar to New England and New York’s Hudson and Champlain valleys
(where the apple has flourished).

and oviducts of the rabbit and compares his findings to the same equipment in
other animals.

appears in many limericks because it rhymes with “sex at her”—as in, “It was
then that Jones pointed his sex at her!” (A famous last line.) I always heard a
lot of Exeter limericks because I was born and grew up in Exeter, New
Hampshire.

because there is a special category of limericks devoted to the peculiarities of
the male and female organs. As in,

There was a young fellow named Cribbs

Whose cock was so big it had ribs.

(1944–51)

And in the famous 1938 limerick that was voted Best Limerick by one of the

graduating classes of Princeton:

There once was a Queen of Bulgaria

Whose bush had grown hairier and hairier,

Till a Prince from Peru

Who came up for a screw

Had to hunt for her cunt with a terrier.

The Toronto limerick is circa 1941.
(p. 367) The Bombay limerick is dated 1879—an old one.
(p. 382) Dr. Larch would have been surprised to learn that his condemning

statistics of unwanted children were still accurate in 1965. Dr. Charles F.
Westoff of Princeton’s Office of Population Research, and the co-director of
the 1965 National Fertility Study, concluded that 750,000 to a million
children—born to married couples between 1960 and 1965—were unwanted.
This estimate is low. Even in a poll, many parents are unwilling to admit that

any child of theirs was unwanted. Furthermore, unwed or abandoned mothers
were not included in the survey; their opinions regarding how many of their
children were unwanted were never counted. For more information on this
subject, see James Trager’s The Bellybook (1972).

population growth was declared in his Observations Concerning the Increase
of Mankind (1755).

Normal Labor,” Williams Obstetrics, Henricus J. Stander—circa 1936. I base
the described procedure on such a dated source—it is performed in my story
in 1943—because I wish to emphasize that Homer’s procedure, which has
been learned from Dr. Larch, is somewhat old-fashioned but nonetheless
correct.

newspapers, at the low price of fifteen guineas.” From David Copperfield,
Chapter 1 (“I Am Born”). The caul is the membrane that is usually ruptured
and expelled at the onset of bearing-down pains but that in rare cases does not
rupture—the child coming into the world surrounded by membrane. In the
time of Dickens, this protective shroud was taken as a sign that the child
would be lucky in life—and, more specifically, never be drowned. In the story
of David Copperfield, this is an early indication that our hero will find his
way and not meet with the form of poor Steerforth’s undoing (Steerforth
drowns).

of sweat that prematurely baptizes his birthing child as having similar
protective powers. Homer’s child will be lucky in life; Angel will not drown.

1939; the eighth edition of Diseases of Women (Roquist, Clayton and Lewis)
was published in 1949.

The medical journals that Larch would always have had on hand—in

addition to The New England Journal of Medicine—are The Journal of the
American Medical Association (in doctors’ shorthand this is always called
JAMA), The American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology (it has the most
vivid illustrations), The Lancet (a British journal), and Surgery, Gynecology
and Obstetrics (in doctors’ shorthand this is always called S, G and O; in
194_, lots of surgeons did gynecology, too).

P.S.

Insights, Interviews & More . . .

About the author

Meet John Irving

THE WORLD ACCORDING TO GARP, which won the National Book Award in
1980, was John Irving’s fourth novel and his first international bestseller; it
also became a George Roy Hill film. Tony Richardson wrote and directed the
adaptation for the screen of The Hotel New Hampshire (1984). Irving’s novels
are now translated into thirty-five languages, and he has had nine
international bestsellers. Worldwide, the Irving novel most often called “an
American classic” is A Prayer for Owen Meany (1989), the portrayal of an
enduring friendship at that time when the Vietnam War had its most divisive
effect on the United States. In 1992, John Irving was inducted into the
National Wrestling Hall of Fame in Stillwater, Oklahoma. (He competed as a
wrestler for twenty years, until he was thirty-four, and coached the sport until
he was forty-seven.) In 2000, Irving won the Oscar for Best Adapted
Screenplay for The Cider House Rules—a Lasse Hallström film that earned
seven Academy Award nominations. Tod Williams wrote and directed The
Door in the Floor—the 2004 film adapted from Mr. Irving’s ninth novel, A
Widow for One Year. In One Person (2012) is John Irving’s thirteenth novel.
 

 
Visit www.AuthorTracker.com for exclusive information on your favorite
HarperCollins authors.

Read on

An excerpt from A Prayer for Owen Meany, John
Irving’s beloved classic

I

The Foul Ball

I am doomed to remember a boy with a wrecked voice—not because of his
voice, or because he was the smallest person I ever knew, or even because he
was the instrument of my mother’s death, but because he is the reason I
believe in God; I am a Christian because of Owen Meany. I make no claims to
have a life in Christ, or with Christ—and certainly not for Christ, which I’ve
heard some zealots claim. I’m not very sophisticated in my knowledge of the
Old Testament, and I’ve not read the New Testament since my Sunday school
days, except for those passages that I hear read aloud to me when I go to
church. I’m somewhat more familiar with the passages from the Bible that
appear in The Book of Common Prayer; I read my prayer book often, and my
Bible only on holy days—the prayer book is so much more orderly.

I’ve always been a pretty regular churchgoer. I used to be a

Congregationalist—I was baptized in the Congregational Church, and after
some years of fraternity with Episcopalians (I was confirmed in the Episcopal
Church, too), I became rather vague in my religion: in my teens I attended a
“nondenominational” church. Then I became an Anglican; the Anglican
Church of Canada has been my church—ever since I left the United States,
about twenty years ago. Being an Anglican is a lot like being an Episcopalian
—so much so that being an Anglican occasionally impresses upon me the
suspicion that I have simply become an Episcopalian again. Anyway, I left the
Congregationalists and the Episcopalians—and my country once and for all.

When I die, I shall attempt to be buried in New Hampshire—alongside my

mother—but the Anglican Church will perform the necessary service before
my body suffers the indignity of trying to be sneaked through U.S. Customs.
My selections from the Order for the Burial of the Dead are entirely
conventional and can be found, in the order that I shall have them read—not
sung—in The Book of Common Prayer. Almost everyone I know will be
familiar with the passages from John, beginning with “. . . whosoever liveth
and believeth in me shall never die.” And then there’s “. . . in my Father’s
house are many mansions: If it were not so, I would have told you.” And I
have always appreciated the frankness expressed in that passage from
Timothy, the one that goes “. . . we brought nothing into this world, and it is
certain we can carry nothing out.” It will be a by-the-book Anglican service,
the kind that would make my former fellow Congregationalists fidget in their
pews. I am an Anglican now, and I shall die an Anglican. But I skip a Sunday
service now and then; I make no claims to be especially pious; I have a
church-rummage faith—the kind that needs patching up every weekend. What
faith I have I owe to Owen Meany, a boy I grew up with. It is Owen who
made me a believer.

In Sunday school, we developed a form of entertainment based on abusing
Owen Meany, who was so small that not only did his feet not touch the floor
when he sat in his chair—his knees did not extend to the edge of his seat;
therefore, his legs stuck out straight, like the legs of a doll. It was as if Owen
Meany had been born without realistic joints.

Owen was so tiny, we loved to pick him up; in truth, we couldn’t resist

picking him up. We thought it was a miracle: how little he weighed. This was
also incongruous because Owen came from a family in the granite business.
The Meany Granite Quarry was a big place, the equipment for blasting and
cutting the granite slabs was heavy and dangerous-looking; granite itself is
such a rough, substantial rock. But the only aura of the granite quarry that
clung to Owen was the granular dust, the gray powder that sprang off his

clothes whenever we lifted him up. He was the color of a gravestone; light
was both absorbed and reflected by his skin, as with a pearl, so that he
appeared translucent at times—especially at his temples, where his blue veins
showed through his skin (as though, in addition to his extraordinary size,
there were other evidence that he was born too soon).

His vocal cords had not developed fully, or else his voice had been injured

by the rock dust of his family’s business. Maybe he had larynx damage, or a
destroyed trachea; maybe he’d been hit in the throat by a chunk of granite. To
be heard at all, Owen had to shout through his nose.

Yet he was dear to us—“a little doll,” the girls called him, while he

squirmed to get away from them; and from all of us.

I don’t remember how our game of lifting Owen began.
This was Christ Church, the Episcopal Church of Gravesend, New

Hampshire. Our Sunday school teacher was a strained, unhappy-looking
woman named Mrs. Walker. We thought this name suited her because her
method of teaching involved a lot of walking out of class. Mrs. Walker would
read us an instructive passage from the Bible. She would then ask us to think
seriously about what we had heard—“Silently and seriously, that’s how I want
you to think!” she would say. “I’m going to leave you alone with your
thoughts, now,” she would tell us ominously—as if our thoughts were capable
of driving us over the edge. “I want you to think very hard,” Mrs. Walker
would say. Then she’d walk out on us. I think she was a smoker, and she
couldn’t allow herself to smoke in front of us. “When I come back,” she’d
say, “we’ll talk about it.”

By the time she came back, of course, we’d forgotten everything about

whatever it was—because as soon as she left the room, we would fool around
with a frenzy. Because being alone with our thoughts was no fun, we would
pick up Owen Meany and pass him back and forth, overhead. We managed
this while remaining seated in our chairs—that was the challenge of the game.
Someone—I forget who started it—would get up, seize Owen, sit back down
with him, pass him to the next person, who would pass him on, and so forth.
The girls were included in this game; some of the girls were the most
enthusiastic about it. Everyone could lift up Owen. We were very careful; we
never dropped him. His shirt might become a little rumpled. His necktie was
so long, Owen tucked it into his trousers—or else it would have hung to his
knees—and his necktie often came untucked; sometimes his change would
fall out (in our faces). We always gave him his money back.

If he had his baseball cards with him, they, too, would fall out of his

pockets. This made him cross because the cards were alphabetized, or ordered
under another system—all the infielders together, maybe. We didn’t know

what the system was, but obviously Owen had a system, because when Mrs.
Walker came back to the room—when Owen returned to his chair and we
passed his nickels and dimes and his baseball cards back to him—he would sit
shuffling through the cards with a grim, silent fury.

He was not a good baseball player, but he did have a very small strike zone

and as a consequence he was often used as a pinch hitter—not because he
ever hit the ball with any authority (in fact, he was instructed never to swing
at the ball), but because he could be relied upon to earn a walk, a base on
balls. In Little League games he resented this exploitation and once refused to
come to bat unless he was allowed to swing at the pitches. But there was no
bat small enough for him to swing that didn’t hurl his tiny body after it—that
didn’t thump him on the back and knock him out of the batter’s box and flat
upon the ground. So, after the humiliation of swinging at a few pitches, and
missing them, and whacking himself off his feet, Owen Meany selected that
other humiliation of standing motionless and crouched at home plate while
the pitcher aimed the ball at Owen’s strike zone—and missed it, almost every
time.

Yet Owen loved his baseball cards—and, for some reason, he clearly loved

the game of baseball itself, although the game was cruel to him. Opposing
pitchers would threaten him. They’d tell him that if he didn’t swing at their
pitches, they’d hit him with the ball. “Your head’s bigger than your strike
zone, pal,” one pitcher told him. So Owen Meany made his way to first base
after being struck by pitches, too.

Once on base, he was a star. No one could run the bases like Owen. If our

team could stay at bat long enough, Owen Meany could steal home. He was
used as a pinch runner in the late innings, too; pinch runner and pinch hitter
Meany—pinch walker Meany, we called him. In the field, he was hopeless.
He was afraid of the ball; he shut his eyes when it came anywhere near him.
And if by some miracle he managed to catch it, he couldn’t throw it; his hand
was too small to get a good grip. But he was no ordinary complainer; if he
was self-pitying, his voice was so original in its expression of complaint that
he managed to make whining lovable.

In Sunday school, when we held Owen up in the air—especially, in the air!

—he protested so uniquely. We tortured him, I think, in order to hear his
voice; I used to think his voice came from another planet. Now I’m convinced
it was a voice not entirely of this world.

“PUT ME DOWN!” he would say in a strangled, emphatic falsetto. “CUT

IT OUT! I DON’T WANT TO DO THIS ANYMORE. ENOUGH IS
ENOUGH. PUT ME DOWN! YOU ASSHOLES!”

But we just passed him around and around. He grew more fatalistic about it,

each time. His body was rigid; he wouldn’t struggle. Once we had him in the
air, he folded his arms defiantly on his chest; he scowled at the ceiling.
Sometimes Owen grabbed hold of his chair the instant Mrs. Walker left the
room; he’d cling like a bird to a swing in its cage, but he was easy to dislodge
because he was ticklish. A girl named Sukey Swift was especially deft at
tickling Owen; instantly, his arms and legs would stick straight out and we’d
have him up in the air again.

“NO TICKLING!” he’d say, but the rules to this game were our rules. We

never listened to Owen.

Inevitably, Mrs. Walker would return to the room when Owen was in the air.

Given the biblical nature of her instructions to us: “to think very hard . . .” she
might have imagined that by a supreme act of our combined and hardest
thoughts we had succeeded in levitating Owen Meany. She might have had
the wit to suspect that Owen was reaching toward heaven as a direct result of
leaving us alone with our thoughts.

But Mrs. Walker’s response was always the same—brutish and

unimaginative and incredibly dense. “Owen!” she would snap. “Owen Meany,
you get back to your seat! You get down from up there!”

What could Mrs. Walker teach us about the Bible if she was stupid enough

to think that Owen Meany had put himself up in the air?

Owen was always dignified about it. He never said, “THEY DID IT! THEY

ALWAYS DO IT! THEY PICK ME UP AND LOSE MY MONEY AND
MESS UP MY BASEBALL CARDS—AND THEY NEVER PUT ME
DOWN WHEN I ASK THEM TO! WHAT DO YOU THINK, THAT I FLEW
UP HERE?”

But although Owen would complain to us, he would never complain about

us. If he was occasionally capable of being a stoic in the air, he was always a
stoic when Mrs. Walker accused him of childish behavior. He would never
accuse us. Owen was no rat. As vividly as any number of the stories in the
Bible, Owen Meany showed us what a martyr was.

It appeared there were no hard feelings. Although we saved our most

ritualized attacks on him for Sunday school, we also lifted him up at other
times—more spontaneously. Once someone hooked him by his collar to a
coat tree in the elementary school auditorium; even then, even there, Owen
didn’t struggle. He dangled silently, and waited for someone to unhook him
and put him down. And after gym class, someone hung him in his locker and
shut the door. “NOT FUNNY! NOT FUNNY!” he called, and called, until
someone must have agreed with him and freed him from the company of his
jockstrap—the size of a slingshot.

How could I have known that Owen was a hero?

Have you read?

SETTING FREE THE BEARS
It is 1967 and two Viennese university students want to liberate the Vienna
Zoo, as was done after World War II. But their good intentions have both
comic and gruesome consequences, in this first novel written by a twenty-
five-year-old John Irving, already a master storyteller.

THE WATER-METHOD MAN
The main character of John Irving’s second novel, written when the author
was twenty-nine, is a perpetual graduate student with a birth defect in his
urinary tract—and a man on the threshold of committing himself to a second
marriage that bears remarkable resemblance to his first. . . .

“Three or four times as funny as most novels.”

—The New Yorker

THE 158-POUND MARRIAGE
The darker vision and sexual ambiguities of this erotic, ironic tale about a
ménage à quatre in a New England university town foreshadow those of The
World According to Garp; but this very trim and precise novel is a marked
departure from the author’s generally robust, boisterous style. Though Mr.
Irving’s cool eye spares none of his foursome, he writes with genuine
compassion for the sexual tests and illusions they perpetrate on one another;
but the sexual intrigue among them demonstrates how even the kind can be
ungenerous, and even the well intentioned, destructive.

“Irving looks cunningly beyond the eye-catching gyrations of the mating
dance to the morning-after implications.”

—Washington Post

THE WORLD ACCORDING TO GARP
This is the life and times of T. S. Garp, the bastard son of Jenny Fields—a
feminist leader ahead of her times. This is the life and death of a famous
mother and her almost-famous son; theirs is a world of sexual extremes—
even of sexual assassinations. It is a novel rich with “lunacy and sorrow”; yet
the dark, violent events of the story do not undermine a comedy both ribald
and robust. In more than thirty languages, in more than forty countries—with
more than ten million copies in print—this novel provides almost cheerful,
even hilarious evidence of its famous last line: “In the world according to
Garp, we are all terminal cases.”

“The most powerful and profound novel about women written by a man in
our generation. . . . Like all extraordinary books, Garp defies synopsis. . . . A
marvelous, important, permanent novel by a serious artist of remarkable
powers.”

—Chicago Sun-Times

THE HOTEL NEW HAMPSHIRE
“The first of my father’s illusions was that bears could survive the life lived
by human beings, and the second was that human beings could survive a life
led in hotels.” So says John Berry, son of a hapless dreamer, brother to a cadre
of eccentric siblings, and chronicler of the lives lived, the loves experienced,
the deaths met, and the myriad strange and wonderful times encountered by
the family Berry. Hoteliers, pet-bear owners, friends of Freud (the animal
trainer and vaudevillian, that is), and playthings of mad fate, they “dream on”
in a funny, sad, outrageous, and moving novel.

“A hectic, gaudy saga with the verve of a Marx Brothers movie.”

—New York Times Book Review

A PRAYER FOR OWEN MEANY

In the summer of 1953, two eleven-year-old boys—best friends—are playing
in a Little League baseball game in Gravesend, New Hampshire. One of the
boys hits a foul ball that kills the other boy’s mother. The boy who hits the
ball doesn’t believe in accidents; Owen Meany believes he is God’s
instrument. What happens to Owen after that 1953 foul ball is extraordinary.

“A remarkable novel . . . a rare creation.”

—Stephen King, Washington Post

TRYING TO SAVE PIGGY SNEED
Here is a treat for John Irving addicts and a perfect introduction to his work
for the uninitiated. To open this spirited collection, Irving explains how he
became a writer. There follow six scintillating stories written over the last
twenty years ending with an homage to Charles Dickens. This irresistible
collection cannot fail to delight and charm.

“Hilarious. Highly enjoyable stories with zany plots and unforgettable
characters, made all the more readable by Irving’s silky smooth prose.”

—The Independent

A SON OF THE CIRCUS

“Dr. Farrokh Daruwalla, reared in Bombay by maverick foes of tradition,
educated in Vienna, married to an Austrian and long a resident of Toronto, is a
fifty-nine-year-old without a country, culture or religion to call his own. . . .
The novel may not be ‘about’ India, but Irving’s imagined India, which
Daruwalla visits periodically, is a remarkable achievement—a pandemonium
of servants and clubmen, dwarf clowns and transvestite whores, missionaries
and movie stars. This is a land of energetic colliding egos, of modern media
clashing with ancient cultures, of broken sexual boundaries.”

—New York Newsday

“A Son of the Circus is comic genius. . . . Get ready for Irving’s most raucous
novel to date.”

—Boston Globe

THE IMAGINARY GIRLFRIEND
The Imaginary Girlfriend is a candid memoir of the writers and wrestlers who
played a role in John Irving’s development as a novelist and as a wrestler. It
also portrays a father’s dedication—Irving coached his two sons to
championship titles. It is an illuminating, concise work, a literary treasure.

“The nearest thing to an autobiography Irving has written. . . . Worth saving
and savoring.”

—Seattle Times

A WIDOW FOR ONE YEAR
Twenty years after The World According to Garp, John Irving gave us his
ninth novel, A Widow for One Year, about a family marked by tragedy. Ruth
Cole is a complex, often self-contradictory character—a “difficult” woman.
By no means is she conventionally “nice,” but she will never be forgotten.
Ruth’s story is told in three parts, each focusing on a critical time in her life.
When we first meet her—on Long Island, in the summer of 1958—Ruth is
only four. The second window into Ruth’s life opens on the fall of 1990, when
she is an unmarried woman whose personal life is not nearly as successful as
her literary career. She distrusts her judgment in men, for good reason. A
Widow for One Year closes in the autumn of 1995, when Ruth Cole is a forty-
one-year-old widow and mother. She’s about to fall in love for the first time.
Richly comic, as well as deeply disturbing, A Widow for One Year is a
multilayered love story of astonishing emotional force. Both ribald and erotic,
it is also a brilliant novel about the passage of time and the relentlessness of
grief.

“By turns antic and moving, lusty and tragic, A Widow for One Year is
bursting with memorable moments.”

—San Francisco Examiner-Chronicle

MY MOVIE BUSINESS
After two producers, four directors, thirteen years, and uncounted rewrites,
the movie version of John Irving’s acclaimed novel The Cider House Rules at
last made it to the big screen. Here is the author’s account of the novel-to-film
process. Anecdotal, affectionate, and delightfully candid, My Movie Business
dazzles with Irving’s incomparable wit and style.

“Writing a novel is like swimming in the sea; writing a film is like swimming
in the bath. . . . This short, amiable book is John Irving’s personal history of
seeing—or not seeing—his novels made into movies. . . . The book digresses
charmingly and effortlessly into related subjects. There is a beguiling memoir
of his grandfather, an eminent surgeon; a brilliant and passionate argument for
the freedom of women to choose abortion . . . observations on the origins of
his novels, and so on. . . . Irving remains cooly objective, and it is clear why:
he is a novelist, first and foremost, and his attitude toward the movie business
is informed by this security and certainty. . . . Irving has done us [writers]
proud.”

—New York Times Book Review

THE FOURTH HAND
While reporting a story from India, New York journalist Patrick Wallingford
inadvertently becomes his own headline when his left hand is eaten by a lion.
In Boston, a renowned surgeon eagerly awaits the opportunity to perform the
nation’s first hand transplant. But what if the donor’s widow demands
visitation rights with the hand? In answering this unexpected question, John
Irving has written a novel that is by turns brilliantly comic and emotionally
moving, offering a penetrating look at the power of second chances and the
will to change.

“A rich and deeply moving tale. . . . Vintage Irving: a story of two very
disparate people, and the strange and unexpected ways we grow.”

—Washington Post Book World

UNTIL I FIND YOU
“According to his mother, Jack Burns was an actor before he was an actor, but
Jack’s most vivid memories of childhood were those moments when he felt
compelled to hold his mother’s hand. He wasn’t acting then.” So begins John
Irving’s eleventh novel, Until I Find You, the story of the actor Jack Burns.
His mother, Alice, is a Toronto tattoo artist. When Jack is four, he travels with
Alice to several Baltic and North Sea ports; they are trying to find Jack’s
missing father, William, a church organist who is addicted to being tattooed.
But Alice is a mystery, and William can’t be found. Even Jack’s memories are
subject to doubt.

Jack Burns is educated at schools in Canada and New England, but he is

shaped by his relationships with older women. Mr. Irving renders Jack’s life
as an actor in Hollywood with the same richness of detail and range of
emotions he uses to describe the tattoo parlors in those Baltic and North Sea
ports and the reverberating music Jack heard as a child in European churches.

The author’s tone—indeed, the narrative voice of this novel—is

melancholic. (“In this way, in increments both measurable and not, our
childhood is stolen from us—not always in one momentous event but often in
a series of small robberies, which add up to the same loss.”) Until I Find You
is suffused with overwhelming sadness and deception; it is also a robust and
comic novel, certain to be compared to Mr. Irving’s most ambitious and
moving work.

“Bittersweet . . . moving.”

—People

LAST NIGHT IN TWISTED RIVER
In 1954, in the cookhouse of a logging and sawmill settlement in northern
New Hampshire, an anxious twelve-year-old boy mistakes the local
constable’s girlfriend for a bear. Both the twelve-year-old and his father
become fugitives, forced to run from Coos County—to Boston, to southern
Vermont, to Toronto—pursued by the implacable constable. Their lone
protector is a fiercely libertarian logger, once a river driver, who befriends
them. In a story spanning five decades, Last Night in Twisted River depicts the
recent half-century in the United States as “a living replica of Coos County,
where lethal hatreds were generally permitted to run their course.” What
further distinguishes Last Night in Twisted River is the author’s unmistakable
voice—the inimitable voice of an accomplished storyteller.

“Absolutely unmissable. . . . [A] bighearted, brilliantly written and superbly
realized intergenerational tale of a father and son.”

—Financial Times

IN ONE PERSON
A compelling novel of desire, secrecy, and sexual identity, In One Person is a
story of unfulfilled love—tormented, funny, and affecting—and an
impassioned embrace of our sexual differences. Billy, the bisexual narrator
and main character of In One Person, tells the tragicomic story (lasting more
than half a century) of his life as a “sexual suspect,” a phrase first used by
John Irving in 1978 in his landmark novel of “terminal cases,” The World
According to Garp.

His most political novel since The Cider House Rules and A Prayer for

Owen Meany, John Irving’s In One Person is a poignant tribute to Billy’s
friends and lovers—a theatrical cast of characters who defy category and
convention. Not least, In One Person is an intimate and unforgettable portrait
of the solitariness of a bisexual man who is dedicated to making himself

“worthwhile.”

Don’t miss the next book by your favorite author. Sign up now for AuthorTracker by visiting

www.AuthorTracker.com.

Also by John Irving

Fiction

In One Person
Last Night in Twisted River
Until I Find You
The Fourth Hand
A Widow for One Year
A Son of the Circus
Trying to Save Piggy Sneed
A Prayer for Owen Meany
The Hotel New Hampshire
The World According to Garp
The 158-Pound Marriage
The Water-Method Man
Setting Free the Bears

Nonfiction

My Movie Business
The Imaginary Girlfriend

Screenplays

The Cider House Rules

Copyright

The Cider House Rules is a work of fiction. Names, characters, places, and
incidents are the products of the author’s imagination or are used fictitiously.
Any resemblance to actual events, locales, or persons, living or dead, is
entirely coincidental.
 
First published in hardcover by William Morrow and Company in 1985.
 
P.S.™ is a trademark of HarperCollins Publishers.
 
Excerpt from A Prayer for Owen Meany copyright © 1989 by Garp
Enterprises, Ltd. The excerpt is taken from the first chapter of the book,
which also appeared in The New Yorker in slightly different form.
 

THE CIDER HOUSE RULES. Copyright © 1985 by Garp Enterprises, Ltd. All
rights reserved. All rights reserved under International and Pan-American
Copyright Conventions. By payment of the required fees, you have been
granted the nonexclusive, nontransferable right to access and read the text of
this e-book on-screen. No part of this text may be reproduced, transmitted,
downloaded, decompiled, reverse-engineered, or stored in or introduced into
any information storage and retrieval system, in any form or by any means,
whether electronic or mechanical, now known or hereinafter invented,
without the express written permission of HarperCollins e-books.
 
FIRST EDITION
 
EPub Edition © AUGUST 2012 ISBN: 9780062235183
 
12  13  14  15  16  10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1

About the Publisher

Australia

HarperCollins Publishers (Australia) Pty. Ltd.

Level 13, 201 Elizabeth Street
Sydney, NSW 2000, Australia

http://www.harpercollins.com.au

Canada

HarperCollins Canada

2 Bloor Street East - 20th Floor
Toronto, ON, M4W, 1A8, Canada

http://www.harpercollins.ca

New Zealand

HarperCollins Publishers (New Zealand) Limited

P.O. Box 1

Auckland, New Zealand

http://www.harpercollins.co.nz

United Kingdom

HarperCollins Publishers Ltd.

77-85 Fulham Palace Road

London, W6 8JB, UK

http://www.harpercollins.co.uk

United States

HarperCollins Publishers Inc.

10 East 53rd Street

New York, NY 10022

http://www.harpercollins.com

