The Human Stain

Philip Roth

VINTAGE INTERNATIONAL

VINTAGE  BOOKS

A  DIVISION   OF   RANDOM  HOUSE, INC. 

NEW  YORK

FIRST VINTAGE INTERNATIONAL EDITION, MAY 2001

Copyright © 2000 by Philip Roth

All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions. Published in

the United States by Vintage Books, a division of Random House, Inc., New York, and

simultaneously in Canada by Random House of Canada Limited, Toronto. Originally published

in hardcover in the United States by Houghton Mifflin Company, New York, in 2000. This

edition published by special arrangement with Houghton Mifflin Company.

Vintage is a registered trademark and Vintage International and colophon are trademarks of

Random House, Inc.

The quotation from Oedipus the King is from the David Grene translation

(Three Greek Tragedies in Translation, University of Chicago Press, 1942). The
dictionary definitions on pp. 84 and 85 are from The Random House Dictionary
of the English Language (1973, p.1375). The author wishes to acknowledge as a
primary source Gouldtown, a Very Remarkable Settlement of Ancient Date, by

William Steward and Theophilus G. Steward (I. B. Lippincott Co., 1913).

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Roth, Philip. The human stain / Philip Roth.

p. cm.

ISBN: 0-375-72634-9
PS3568.O855 H8 2001

813'.54—dc21

00-063391

www.vintagebooks.com

Printed in the United States of America          20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11

For R. M.

OEDIPUS:

What is the rite

of purification? How shall it be done?

CREON:

By banishing a man, or expiation of blood by blood...

—Sophocles, Oedipus the King

Everyone Knows

IT WAS in the summer of 1998 that my neighbor Coleman Silk—
who, before retiring two years earlier, had been a classics professor
at nearby Athena College for some twenty-odd years as well as serv-
ing for sixteen more as the dean of faculty—confided to me that, at
the age of seventy-one, he was having an affair with a thirty-four-
year-old cleaning woman who worked down at the college. Twice a
week she also cleaned the rural post office, a small gray clapboard
shack that looked as if it might have sheltered an Okie family from
the winds of the Dust Bowl back in the 1930s and that, sitting alone
and forlorn across from the gas station and the general store, flies
its American flag at the junction of the two roads that mark the
commercial center of this mountainside town.

Coleman had first seen the woman mopping the post office floor

when he went around late one day, a few minutes before closing
time, to get his mail—a thin, tall, angular woman with graying
blond hair yanked back into a ponytail and the kind of severely
sculpted features customarily associated with the church-ruled,
hardworking goodwives who suffered through New England's
harsh beginnings, stern colonial women locked up within the reign-
ing morality and obedient to it. Her name was Faunia Farley, and
whatever miseries she endured she kept concealed behind one of
those inexpressive bone faces that hide nothing and bespeak an

THE  HUMAN  STAIN

immense loneliness. Faunia lived in a room at a local dairy farm
where she helped with the milking in order to pay her rent. She'd
had two years of high school education.

The summer that Coleman took me into his confidence about

Faunia Farley and their secret was the summer, fittingly enough,
that Bill Clinton's secret emerged in every last mortifying detail—
every last lifelike detail, the livingness, like the mortification, ex-
uded by the pungency of the specific data. We hadn't had a season
like it since somebody stumbled upon the new Miss America nude
in an old issue of Penthouse, pictures of her elegantly posed on her
knees and on her back that forced the shamed young woman to re-
linquish her crown and go on to become a huge pop star. Ninety-
eight in New England was a summer of exquisite warmth and sun-
shine, in baseball a summer of mythical battle between a home-run
god who was white and a home-run god who was brown, and in
America the summer of an enormous piety binge, a purity binge,
when terrorism—which had replaced communism as the prevail-
ing threat to the country's security—was succeeded by cocksuck-
ing, and a virile, youthful middle-aged president and a brash, smit-
ten twenty-one-year-old employee carrying on in the Oval Office
like two teenage kids in a parking lot revived America's oldest com-
munal passion, historically perhaps its most treacherous and sub-
versive pleasure: the ecstasy of sanctimony. In the Congress, in the
press, and on the networks, the righteous grandstanding creeps,
crazy to blame, deplore, and punish, were everywhere out moraliz-
ing to beat the band: all of them in a calculated frenzy with what
Hawthorne (who, in the 1860s, lived not many miles from my door)
identified in the incipient country of long ago as "the persecut-
ing spirit"; all of them eager to enact the astringent rituals of puri-
fication that would excise the erection from the executive branch,
thereby making things cozy and safe enough for Senator Lieber-
man's ten-year-old daughter to watch TV with her embarrassed
daddy again. No, if you haven't lived through 1998, you don't know
what sanctimony is. The syndicated conservative newspaper col-
umnist William F. Buckley wrote, "When Abelard did it, it was

possible to prevent its happening again," insinuating that the presi-
dent's malfeasance—what Buckley elsewhere called Clinton's "in-
continent carnality"—might best be remedied with nothing so
bloodless as impeachment but, rather, by the twelfth-century pun-
ishment meted out to Canon Abelard by the knife-wielding as-
sociates of Abelard's ecclesiastical colleague, Canon Fulbert, for
Abelard's secret seduction of and marriage to Fulbert's niece, the
virgin Heloise. Unlike Khomeini's fatwa condemning to death Sal-
man Rushdie, Buckley's wistful longing for the corrective retribu-
tion of castration carried with it no financial incentive for any pro-
spective perpetrator. It was prompted by a spirit no less exacting
than the ayatollah's, however, and in behalf of no less exalted ideals.
It was the summer in America when the nausea returned, when
the joking didn't stop, when the speculation and the theorizing and
the hyperbole didn't stop, when the moral obligation to explain to
one's children about adult life was abrogated in favor of maintain-
ing in them every illusion about adult life, when the smallness of
people was simply crushing, when some kind of demon had been
unleashed in the nation and, on both sides, people wondered "Why
are we so crazy?," when men and women alike, upon awakening in
the morning, discovered that during the night, in a state of sleep
that transported them beyond envy or loathing, they had dreamed
of the brazenness of Bill Clinton. I myself dreamed of a mammoth
banner, draped dadaistically like a Christo wrapping from one end
of the White House to the other and bearing the legend A HUMAN

BEING LIVES HERE. It was the summer when—for the billionth
time—the jumble, the mayhem, the mess proved itself more subtle
than this one's ideology and that one's morality. It was the summer
when a president's penis was on everyone's mind, and life, in all its
shameless impurity, once again confounded America.

Sometimes on a Saturday, Coleman Silk would give me a ring and
invite me to drive over from my side of the mountain after dinner
to listen to music, or to play, for a penny a point, a little gin rummy,
or to sit in his living room for a couple of hours and sip some co-

THE  HUMAN  STAIN

gnac and help him get through what was always for him the worst
night of the week. By the summer of 1998, he had been alone up
here—alone in the large old white clapboard house where he'd
raised four children with his wife, Iris—for close to two years, ever
since Iris suffered a stroke and died overnight while he was in the
midst of battling with the college over a charge of racism brought
against him by two students in one of his classes.

Coleman had by then been at Athena almost all his academic

life, an outgoing, sharp-witted, forcefully smooth big-city charmer,
something of a warrior, something of an operator, hardly the pro-
totypical pedantic professor of Latin and Greek (as witness the
Conversational Greek and Latin Club that he started, heretically, as
a young instructor). His venerable survey course in ancient Greek
literature in translation—known as GHM, for Gods, Heroes, and
Myth—was popular with students precisely because of everything
direct, frank, and unacademically forceful in his comportment.
"You know how European literature begins?" he'd ask, after having
taken the roll at the first class meeting. "With a quarrel. All of Euro-
pean literature springs from a fight." And then he picked up his
copy of The Iliad and read to the class the opening lines. "'Divine
Muse, sing of the ruinous wrath of Achilles . . . Begin where they
first quarreled, Agamemnon the King of men, and great Achilles.'
And what are they quarreling about, these two violent, mighty
souls? It's as basic as a barroom brawl. They are quarreling over a
woman. A girl, really. A girl stolen from her father. A girl abducted
in a war. Now, Agamemnon much prefers this girl to his wife,
Clytemnestra. 'Clytemnestra is not as good as she is,' he says,
'neither in face nor in figure.' That puts directly enough, does
it not, why he doesn't want to give her up? When Achilles de-
mands that Agamemnon return the girl to her father in order to as-
suage Apollo, the god who is murderously angry about the
circumstances surrounding her abduction, Agamemnon refuses:
he'll agree only if Achilles gives him his girl in exchange. Thus
reigniting Achilles. Adrenal Achilles: the most highly flammable of

explosive wildmen any writer has ever enjoyed portraying; espe-
cially where his prestige and his appetite are concerned, the most
hypersensitive killing machine in the history of warfare. Celebrated
Achilles: alienated and estranged by a slight to his honor. Great
heroic Achilles, who, through the strength of his rage at an insult—
the insult of not getting the girl—isolates himself, positions himself
defiantly outside the very society whose glorious protector he is and
whose need of him is enormous. A quarrel, then, a brutal quarrel
over a young girl and her young body and the delights of sexual ra-
pacity: there, for better or worse, in this offense against the phallic
entitlement, the phallic dignity, of a powerhouse of a warrior
prince, is how the great imaginative literature of Europe begins, and
that is why, close to three thousand years later, we are going to begin
there today . . ."

Coleman was one of a handful of Jews on the Athena faculty

when he was hired and perhaps among the first of the Jews permit-
ted to teach in a classics department anywhere in America; a few
years earlier, Athena's solitary Jew had been E. I. Lonoff, the all-but-
forgotten short story writer whom, back when I was myself a newly
published apprentice in trouble and eagerly seeking the validation
of a master, I had once paid a memorable visit to here. Through the
eighties and into the nineties, Coleman was also the first and only
Jew ever to serve at Athena as dean of faculty; then, in 1995, after re-
tiring as dean in order to round out his career back in the class-
room, he resumed teaching two of his courses under the aegis of
the combined languages and literature program that had absorbed
the Classics Department and that was run by Professor Delphine
Roux. As dean, and with the full support of an ambitious new pres-
ident, Coleman had taken an antiquated, backwater, Sleepy Hol-
lowish college and, not without steamrolling, put an end to the
place as a gentlemen's farm by aggressively encouraging the dead-
wood among the faculty's old guard to seek early retirement, re-
cruiting ambitious young assistant professors, and revolutionizing
the curriculum. It's almost a certainty that had he retired, without

incident, in his own good time, there would have been the fest-
schrift, there would have been the institution of the Coleman Silk
Lecture Series, there would have been a classical studies chair es-
tablished in his name, and perhaps—given his importance to the
twentieth-century revitalization of the place—the humanities
building or even North Hall, the college's landmark, would have
been renamed in his honor after his death. In the small academic
world where he had lived the bulk of his life, he would have long
ceased to be resented or controversial or even feared, and, instead,
officially glorified forever.

It was about midway into his second semester back as a full-

time professor that Coleman spoke the self-incriminating word
that would cause him voluntarily to sever all ties to the college—the
single self-incriminating word of the many millions spoken aloud
in his years of teaching and administering at Athena, and the word
that, as Coleman understood things, directly led to his wife's death.

The class consisted of fourteen students. Coleman had taken at-

tendance at the beginning of the first several lectures so as to learn
their names. As there were still two names that failed to elicit a re-
sponse by the fifth week into the semester, Coleman, in the sixth
week, opened the session by asking, "Does anyone know these peo-
ple? Do they exist or are they spooks?"

Later that day he was astonished to be called in by his successor,

the new dean of faculty, to address the charge of racism brought
against him by the two missing students, who turned out to be
black, and who, though absent, had quickly learned of the locution
in which he'd publicly raised the question of their absence. Cole-
man told the dean, "I was referring to their possibly ectoplasmic
character. Isn't that obvious? These two students had not attended a
single class. That's all I knew about them. I was using the word in its
customary and primary meaning: 'spook' as a specter or a ghost. I
had no idea what color these two students might be. I had known
perhaps fifty years ago but had wholly forgotten that 'spooks' is an
invidious term sometimes applied to blacks. Otherwise, since I am
totally meticulous regarding student sensibilities, I would never

EVERYONE   KNOWS

have used that word. Consider the context: Do they exist or are they
spooks? The charge of racism is spurious. It is preposterous. My
colleagues know it is preposterous and my students know it is pre-
posterous. The issue, the only issue, is the nonattendance of these
two students and their flagrant and inexcusable neglect of work.
What's galling is that the charge is not just false—it is spectacularly
false." Having said altogether enough in his defense, considering
the matter closed, he left for home.

Now, even ordinary deans, I am told, serving as they do in a no

man's land between the faculty and the higher administration, in-
variably make enemies. They don't always grant the salary raises
that are requested or the convenient parking places that are so cov-
eted or the larger offices professors believe they are entitled to.
Candidates for appointments or promotion, especially in weak de-
partments, are routinely rejected. Departmental petitions for ad-
ditional faculty positions and secretarial help are almost always
turned down, as are requests for reduced teaching loads and for
freedom from early morning classes. Funds for travel to academic
conferences are regularly denied, et cetera, et cetera. But Coleman
had been no ordinary dean, and who he got rid of and how he got
rid of them, what he abolished and what he established, and how
audaciously he performed his job into the teeth of tremendous
resistance succeeded in more than merely slighting or offending a
few odd ingrates and malcontents. Under the protection of Pierce
Roberts, the handsome young hotshot president with all the hair
who came in and appointed him to the deanship—and who told
him, "Changes are going to be made, and anybody who's un-
happy should just think about leaving or early retirement"—Cole-
man had overturned everything. When, eight years later, midway
through Coleman's tenure, Roberts accepted a prestigious Big Ten
presidency, it was on the strength of a reputation for all that had
been achieved at Athena in record time—achieved, however, not by
the glamorous president who was essentially a fund-raiser, who'd
taken none of the hits and moved on from Athena heralded and
unscathed, but by his determined dean of faculty.

In the very first month he was appointed dean, Coleman had in-

vited every faculty member in for a talk, including several senior
professors who were the scions of the old county families who'd
founded and originally endowed the place and who themselves
didn't really need the money but gladly accepted their salaries. Each
of them was instructed beforehand to bring along his or her c.v.,
and if someone didn't bring it, because he or she was too grand,
Coleman had it in front of him on his desk anyway. And for a full
hour he kept them there, sometimes even longer, until, having
so persuasively indicated that things at Athena had at long last
changed, he had begun to make them sweat. Nor did he hesitate to
open the interview by flipping through the c.v. and saying, "For the
last eleven years, just what have you been doing?" And when they
told him, as an overwhelming number of the faculty did, that
they'd been publishing regularly in Athena Notes, when he'd heard
one time too many about the philological, bibliographical, or ar-
chaeological scholarly oddment each of them annually culled from
an ancient Ph.D. dissertation for "publication" in the mimeo-
graphed quarterly bound in gray cardboard that was cataloged no-
where on earth but in the college library, he was reputed to have
dared to break the Athena civility code by saying, "In other words,
you people recycle your own trash." Not only did he then shut
down Athena Notes by returning the tiny bequest to the donor—
the father-in-law of the editor—but, to encourage early retirement,
he forced the deadest of the deadwood out of the courses they'd
been delivering by rote for the last twenty or thirty years and into
freshman English and the history survey and the new freshman ori-
entation program held during the hot last days of the summer. He
eliminated the ill-named Scholar of the Year Prize and assigned the
thousand dollars elsewhere. For the first time in the college's his-
tory, he made people apply formally, with a detailed project de-
scription, for paid sabbatical leave, which was more often than not
denied. He got rid of the clubby faculty lunchroom, which boasted
the most exquisite of the paneled oak interiors on the campus, con-
verted it back into the honors seminar room it was intended to be,

and made the faculty eat in the cafeteria with the students. He in-
sisted on faculty meetings—never holding them had made the pre-
vious dean enormously popular. Coleman had attendance taken by
the faculty secretary so that even the eminences with the three-
hour-a-week schedules were forced onto the campus to show up.
He found a provision in the college constitution that said there
were to be no executive committees, and arguing that those stodgy
impediments to serious change had grown up only by convention
and tradition, he abolished them and ruled these faculty meetings
by fiat, using each as an occasion to announce what he was going to
do next that was sure to stir up even more resentment. Under his
leadership, promotion became difficult—and this, perhaps, was the
greatest shock of all: people were no longer promoted through rank
automatically on the basis of being popular teachers, and they
didn't get salary increases that weren't tied to merit. In short, he
brought in competition, he made the place competitive, which, as
an early enemy noted, "is what Jews do." And whenever an angry ad
hoc committee was formed to go and complain to Pierce Roberts,
the president unfailingly backed Coleman.

In the Roberts years all the bright younger people he recruited

loved Coleman because of the room he was making for them and
because of the good people he began hiring out of graduate pro-
grams at Johns Hopkins and Yale and Cornell—"the revolution of
quality," as they themselves liked to describe it. They prized him for
taking the ruling elite out of their little club and threatening their
self-presentation, which never fails to drive a pompous professor
crazy. All the older guys who were the weakest part of the faculty
had survived on the ways that they thought of themselves—the
greatest scholar of the year 100 B.C., and so forth—and once those
were challenged from above, their confidence eroded and, in a mat-
ter of a few years, they had nearly all disappeared. Heady times! But
after Pierce Roberts moved on to the big job at Michigan, and
Haines, the new president, came in with no particular loyalty to
Coleman—and, unlike his predecessor, exhibiting no special toler-
ance for the brand of bulldozing vanity and autocratic ego that had

cleaned the place out in so brief a period—and as the young people
Coleman had kept on as well as those he'd recruited began to be-
come the veteran faculty, a reaction against Dean Silk started to
set in. How strong it was he had never entirely realized until he
counted all the people, department by department, who seemed to
be not at all displeased that the word the old dean had chosen to
characterize his two seemingly nonexistent students was definable
not only by the primary dictionary meaning that he maintained
was obviously the one he'd intended but by the pejorative racial
meaning that had sent his two black students to lodge their com-
plaint.

I remember clearly that April day two years back when Iris Silk died
and the insanity took hold of Coleman. Other than to offer a nod to
one or the other of them whenever our paths crossed down at the
general store or the post office, I had not really known the Silks or
anything much about them before then. I hadn't even known that
Coleman had grown up some four or five miles away from me in
the tiny Essex County town of East Orange, New Jersey, and that,
as a 1944 graduate of East Orange High, he had been some six
years ahead of me in my neighboring Newark school. Coleman had
made no effort to get to know me, nor had I left New York and
moved into a two-room cabin set way back in a field on a rural road
high in the Berkshires to meet new people or to join a new commu-
nity. The invitations I received during my first months out here in
1993—to come to a dinner, to tea, to a cocktail party, to trek to the
college down in the valley to deliver a public lecture or, if I pre-
ferred, to talk informally to a literature class—I politely declined,
and after that both the neighbors and the college let me be to live
and do my work on my own.

But then, on that afternoon two years back, having driven di-

rectly from making arrangements for Iris's burial, Coleman was at
the side of my house, banging on the door and asking to be let in.
Though he had something urgent to ask, he couldn't stay seated

for more than thirty seconds to clarify what it was. He got up,
sat down, got up again, roamed round and round my workroom,
speaking loudly and in a rush, even menacingly shaking a fist in the
air when—erroneously—he believed emphasis was needed. I had
to write something for him—he all but ordered me to. If he wrote
the story in all of its absurdity, altering nothing, nobody would be-
lieve it, nobody would take it seriously, people would say it was a
ludicrous lie, a self-serving exaggeration, they would say that more
than his having uttered the word "spooks" in a classroom had to
lie behind his downfall. But if I wrote it, if a professional writer
wrote it...

All the restraint had collapsed within him, and so watching him,

listening to him—a man I did not know, but clearly someone ac-
complished and of consequence now completely unhinged—was
like being present at a bad highway accident or a fire or a frighten-
ing explosion, at a public disaster that mesmerizes as much by its
improbability as by its grotesqueness. The way he careened around
the room made me think of those familiar chickens that keep on
going after having been beheaded. His head had been lopped off,
the head encasing the educated brain of the once unassailable fac-
ulty dean and classics professor, and what I was witnessing was the
amputated rest of him spinning out of control.

I—whose house he had never before entered, whose very voice

he had barely heard before—had to put aside whatever else I might
be doing and write about how his enemies at Athena, in striking
out at him, had instead felled her. Creating their false image of him,
calling him everything that he wasn't and could never be, they had
not merely misrepresented a professional career conducted with
the utmost seriousness and dedication—they had killed his wife of
over forty years. Killed her as if they'd taken aim and fired a bullet
into her heart. I had to write about this "absurdity," that "absur-
dity"—I, who then knew nothing about his woes at the college
and could not even begin to follow the chronology of the horror
that, for five months now, had engulfed him and the late Iris

Silk: the punishing immersion in meetings, hearings, and inter-
views, the documents and letters submitted to college officials, to
faculty committees, to a pro bono black lawyer representing the
two students . . . the charges, denials, and countercharges, the ob-
tuseness, ignorance, and cynicism, the gross and deliberate misin-
terpretations, the laborious, repetitious explanations, the prosecu-
torial questions—and always, perpetually, the pervasive sense of
unreality. "Her murder!" Coleman cried, leaning across my desk
and hammering on it with his fist. "These people murdered Iris!"

The face he showed me, the face he placed no more than a foot

from my own, was by now dented and lopsided and—for the face
of a well-groomed, youthfully handsome older man—strangely re-
pellent, more than likely distorted from the toxic effect of all the
emotion coursing through him. It was, up close, bruised and ruined
like a piece of fruit that's been knocked from its stall in the mar-
ketplace and kicked to and fro along the ground by the passing
shoppers.

There is something fascinating about what moral suffering can

do to someone who is in no obvious way a weak or feeble person.
It's more insidious even than what physical illness can do, because
there is no morphine drip or spinal block or radical surgery to alle-
viate it. Once you're in its grip, it's as though it will have to kill you
for you to be free of it. Its raw realism is like nothing else.

Murdered. For Coleman that alone explained how, out of no-

where, the end could have come to an energetic sixty-four-year-old
woman of commanding presence and in perfect health, an abstract
painter whose canvases dominated the local art shows and who
herself autocratically administered the town artists' association, a
poet published in the county newspaper, in her day the college's
leading politically active opponent of bomb shelters, of strontium
90, eventually of the Vietnam War, opinionated, unyielding, impol-
itic, an imperious whirlwind of a woman recognizable a hundred
yards away by her great tangled wreath of wiry white hair; so strong
a person, apparently, that despite his own formidableness, the dean
who reputedly could steamroll anybody, the dean who had done

EVERYONE   KNOWS

the academically impossible by bringing deliverance to Athena Col-
lege, could best his own wife at nothing other than tennis.

Once Coleman had come under attack, however—once the racist

charge had been taken up for investigation, not only by the new
dean of faculty but by the college's small black student organization
and by a black activist group from Pittsfield—the outright madness
of it blotted out the million difficulties of the Silks' marriage, and
that same imperiousness that had for four decades clashed with his
own obstinate autonomy and resulted in the unending friction
of their lives, Iris placed at the disposal of her husband's cause.
Though for years they had not slept in the same bed or been able to
endure very much of the other's conversation—or of the other's
friends—the Silks were side by side again, waving their fists in the
faces of people they hated more profoundly than, in their most in-
sufferable moments, they could manage to hate each other. All
they'd had in common as comradely lovers forty years earlier in
Greenwich Village—when he was at NYU finishing up his Ph.D.
and Iris was an escapee fresh from two nutty anarchist parents in
Passaic and modeling for life drawing classes at the Art Students
League, armed already with her thicket of important hair, big-
featured and voluptuous, already then a theatrical-looking high
priestess in folkloric jewelry, the biblical high priestess from before
the time of the synagogue—all they'd had in common in those Vil-
lage days (except for the erotic passion) once again broke wildly out
into the open ... until the morning when she awakened with a fero-
cious headache and no feeling in one of her arms. Coleman rushed
her to the hospital, but by the next day she was dead.

"They meant to kill me and they got her instead." So Coleman

told me more than once during that unannounced visit to my
house, and then made sure to tell every single person at her fu-
neral the following afternoon. And so he still believed. He was not
susceptible to any other explanation. Ever since her death—and
since he'd come to recognize that his ordeal wasn't a subject I
wished to address in my fiction and he had accepted back from me
all the documentation dumped on my desk that day—he had been

THE  HUMAN   STAIN

at work on a book of his own about why he had resigned from
Athena, a nonfiction book he was calling Spooks.

There's a small FM station over in Springfield that on Saturday
nights, from six to midnight, takes a break from the regular classical
programming and plays big-band music for the first few hours of
the evening and then jazz later on. On my side of the mountain you
get nothing but static tuning to that frequency, but on the slope
where Coleman lives the reception's fine, and on the occasions
when he'd invite me for a Saturday evening drink, all those sugary-
sweet dance tunes that kids of our generation heard continuously
over the radio and played on the jukeboxes back in the forties could
be heard coming from Coleman's house as soon as I stepped out of
my car in his driveway. Coleman had it going full blast not just on
the living room stereo receiver but on the radio beside his bed, the
radio beside the shower, and the radio beside the kitchen bread box.
No matter what he might be doing around the house on a Saturday
night, until the station signed off at midnight—following a ritual
weekly half hour of Benny Goodman—he wasn't out of earshot for
a minute.

Oddly, he said, none of the serious stuff he'd been listening to all

his adult life put him into emotional motion the way that old swing
music now did: "Everything stoical within me unclenches and the
wish not to die, never to die, is almost too great to bear. And
all this," he explained, "from listening to Vaughn Monroe." Some
nights, every line of every song assumed a significance so bizarrely
momentous that he'd wind up dancing by himself the shuffling,
drifting, repetitious, uninspired, yet wonderfully serviceable,
mood-making fox trot that he used to dance with the East Orange
High girls on whom he pressed, through his trousers, his first
meaningful erections; and while he danced, nothing he was feel-
ing, he told me, was simulated, neither the terror (over extinction)
nor the rapture (over "You sigh, the song begins. You speak, and
I hear violins"). The teardrops were all spontaneously shed, how-
ever astonished he may have been by how little resistance he had to

Helen O'Connell and Bob Eberly alternately delivering the verses of
"Green Eyes," however much he might marvel at how Jimmy and
Tommy Dorsey were able to transform him into the kind of assail-
able old man he could never have expected to be. "But let anyone
born in 1926," he'd say, "try to stay alone at home on a Saturday
night in 1998 and listen to Dick Haymes singing 'Those Little White
Lies.' Just have them do that, and then let them tell me afterwards if
they have not understood at last the celebrated doctrine of the ca-
tharsis effected by tragedy."

Coleman was cleaning up his dinner dishes when I came through

a screen door at the side of the house leading into the kitchen. Be-
cause he was over the sink and the water was running, and because
the radio was loudly playing and he was singing along with the
young Frank Sinatra "Everything Happens to Me," he didn't hear
me come in. It was a hot night; Coleman wore a pair of denim
shorts and sneakers, and that was it. From behind, this man of sev-
enty-one looked to be no more than forty—slender and fit and
forty. Coleman was not much over five eight, if that, he was not
heavily muscled, and yet there was a lot of strength in him, and a lot
of the bounce of the high school athlete was still visible, the quick-
ness, the urge to action that we used to call pep. His tightly coiled,
short-clipped hair had turned the color of oatmeal, and so head-
on, despite the boyish snub nose, he didn't look quite so youthful as
he might have if his hair were still dark. Also, there were crevices
carved deeply at either side of his mouth, and in the greenish hazel
eyes there was, since Iris's death and his resignation from the col-
lege, much, much weariness and spiritual depletion. Coleman had
the incongruous, almost puppetlike good looks that you confront
in the aging faces of movie actors who were famous on the screen
as sparkling children and on whom the juvenile star is indelibly
stamped.

All in all, he remained a neat, attractive package of a man even at

his age, the small-nosed Jewish type with the facial heft in the jaw,
one of those crimped-haired Jews of a light yellowish skin pigmen-
tation who possess something of the ambiguous aura of the pale

THE   HUMAN   STAIN

blacks who are sometimes taken for white. When Coleman Silk was
a sailor at the Norfolk naval base down in Virginia at the close of
World War II, because his name didn't give him away as a Jew—be-
cause it could as easily have been a Negro's name—he'd once been
identified, in a brothel, as a nigger trying to pass and been thrown
out. "Thrown out of a Norfolk whorehouse for being black, thrown
out of Athena College for being white." I'd heard stuff like that
from him frequently during these last two years, ravings about
black anti-Semitism and about his treacherous, cowardly col-
leagues that were obviously being mainlined, unmodified, into his
book.

"Thrown out of Athena," he told me, "for being a white Jew of

the sort those ignorant bastards call the enemy. That's who's made
their American misery. That's who stole them out of paradise. And
that's who's been holding them back all these years. What is the ma-
jor source of black suffering on this planet? They know the answer
without having to come to class. They know without having to
open a book. Without reading they know—without thinking they
know. Who is responsible? The same evil Old Testament monsters
responsible for the suffering of the Germans.

"They killed her, Nathan. And who would have thought that Iris

couldn't take it? But strong as she was, loud as she was, Iris could
not. Their brand of stupidity was too much even for a juggernaut
like my wife. 'Spooks.' And who here would defend me? Herb
Keble? As dean I brought Herb Keble into the college. Did it only
months after taking the job. Brought him in not just as the first
black in the social sciences but as the first black in anything other
than a custodial position. But Herb too has been radicalized by the
racism of Jews like me. 'I can't be with you on this, Coleman. I'm
going to have to be with them.' This is what he told me when I went
to ask for his support. To my face. I'm going to have to be with them.
Them!

"You should have seen Herb at Iris's funeral. Crushed. Devas-

tated. Somebody died? Herbert didn't intend for anybody to die.

These shenanigans were so much jockeying for power. To gain a
bigger say in how the college is run. They were just exploiting a use-
ful situation. It was a way to prod Haines and the administration
into doing what they otherwise would never have done. More
blacks on campus. More black students, more black professors.
Representation—that was the issue. The only issue. God knows no-
body was meant to die. Or to resign either. That too took Herbert
by surprise. Why should Coleman Silk resign? Nobody was going to
fire him. Nobody would dare to fire him. They were doing what
they were doing just because they could do it. Their intention was
to hold my feet over the flames just a little while longer—why
couldn't I have been patient and waited? By the next semester who
would have remembered any of it? The incident—the incident!—
provided them with an 'organizing issue' of the sort that was
needed at a racially retarded place like Athena. Why did I quit? By
the time I quit it was essentially over. What the hell was I quitting
for?"

On just my previous visit, Coleman had begun waving some-

thing in my face from the moment I'd come through the door, yet
another document from the hundreds of documents filed in the
boxes labeled "Spooks." "Here. One of my gifted colleagues. Writ-
ing about one of the two who brought the charges against me—a
student who had never attended my class, flunked all but one of the
other courses she was taking, and rarely attended them. I thought
she flunked because she couldn't confront the material, let alone
begin to master it, but it turned out that she flunked because she
was too intimidated by the racism emanating from her white pro-
fessors to work up the courage to go to class. The very racism that
I had articulated. In one of those meetings, hearings, whatever
they were, they asked me, 'What factors, in your judgment, led to
this student's failure?' 'What factors?' I said. 'Indifference. Arro-
gance. Apathy. Personal distress. Who knows?' 'But,' they asked me,
'in light of these factors, what positive recommendations did you
make to this student?' 'I didn't make any. I'd never laid eyes on her.

THE   HUMAN   STAIN

If I'd had the opportunity, I would have recommended that she
leave school.' 'Why?' they asked me. 'Because she didn't belong in
school.'

"Let me read from this document. Listen to this. Filed by a col-

league of mine supporting Tracy Cummings as someone we should
not be too harsh or too quick to judge, certainly not someone we
should turn away and reject. Tracy we must nurture, Tracy we must
understand—we have to know, this scholar tells us, 'where Tracy's
coming from.' Let me read you the last sentences. 'Tracy is from a
rather difficult background, in that she separated from her imme-
diate family in tenth grade and lived with relatives. As a result, she
was not particularly good at dealing with the realities of a situation.
This defect I admit. But she is ready, willing, and able to change her
approach to living. What I have seen coming to birth in her during
these last weeks is a realization of the seriousness of her avoidance
of reality.' Sentences composed by one Delphine Roux, chairman
of Languages and Literature, who teaches, among other things, a
course in French classicism. A realization of the seriousness of her
avoidance of reality. Ah, enough. Enough. This is sickening. This is
just too sickening."

That's what I witnessed, more often than not, when I came to

keep Coleman company on a Saturday night: a humiliating dis-
grace that was still eating away at someone who was still fully vital.
The great man brought low and suffering still the shame of fail-
ure. Something like what you might have seen had you dropped
in on Nixon at San Clemente or on Jimmy Carter, down in Geor-
gia, before he began doing penance for his defeat by becoming a
carpenter. Something very sad. And yet, despite my sympathy for
Coleman's ordeal and for all he had unjustly lost and for the near
impossibility of his tearing himself free from his bitterness, there
were evenings when, after having sipped only a few drops of his
brandy, it required something like a feat of magic for me to stay
awake.

But on the night I'm describing, when we had drifted onto the

cool screened-in side porch that he used in the summertime as a

study, he was as fond of the world as a man can be. He'd pulled a
couple of bottles of beer from the refrigerator when we left the
kitchen, and we were seated across from each other at either side of
the long trestle table that was his desk out there and that was
stacked at one end with composition books, some twenty or thirty
of them, divided into three piles.

"Well, there it is," said Coleman, now this calm, unoppressed, en-

tirely new being. "That's it. That's Spooks. Finished a first draft yes-
terday, spent all day today reading it through, and every page of it
made me sick. The violence in the handwriting was enough to
make me despise the author. That I should spend a single quarter of
an hour at this, let alone two years . . . Iris died because of them?
Who will believe it? I hardly believe it myself any longer. To turn
this screed into a book, to bleach out the raging misery and turn it
into something by a sane human being, would take two years more
at least. And what would I then have, aside from two years more of
thinking about 'them'? Not that I've given myself over to forgive-
ness. Don't get me wrong: I hate the bastards. I hate the fucking
bastards the way Gulliver hates the whole human race after he goes
and lives with those horses. I hate them with a real biological aver-
sion. Though those horses I always found ridiculous. Didn't you? I
used to think of them as the WASP establishment that ran this
place when I first got here."

"You're in good form, Coleman—barely a glimmer of the old

madness. Three weeks, a month ago, whenever it was I saw you last,
you were still knee-deep in your own blood."

"Because of this thing. But I read it and it's shit and I'm over it. I

can't do what the pros do. Writing about myself, I can't maneuver
the creative remove. Page after page, it is still the raw thing. It's a
parody of the self-justifying memoir. The hopelessness of explana-
tion." Smiling, he said, "Kissinger can unload fourteen hundred
pages of this stuff every other year, but it's defeated me. Blindly se-
cure though I may seem to be in my narcissistic bubble, I'm no
match for him. I quit."

Now, most writers who are brought to a standstill after rereading

THE   HUMAN   STAIN

two years' work—even one year's work, merely half a year's work—
and finding it hopelessly misguided and bringing down on it the
critical guillotine are reduced to a state of suicidal despair from
which it can take months to begin to recover. Yet Coleman, by
abandoning a draft of a book as bad as the draft he'd finished, had
somehow managed to swim free not only from the wreck of the
book but from the wreck of his life. Without the book he appeared
now to be without the slightest craving to set the record straight;
shed of the passion to clear his name and criminalize as murderers
his opponents, he was embalmed no longer in injustice. Aside from
watching Nelson Mandela, on TV, forgiving his jailers even as he
was leaving jail with his last miserable jail meal still being assimi-
lated into his system, I'd never before seen a change of heart trans-
form a martyred being quite so swiftly. I couldn't understand it,
and I at first couldn't bring myself to believe in it either.

"Walking away like this, cheerfully saying, 'It's defeated me,'

walking away from all this work, from all this loathing—well, how
are you going to fill the outrage void?"

"I'm not." He got the cards and a notepad to keep score and we

pulled our chairs down to where the trestle table was clear of pa-
pers. He shuffled the cards and I cut them and he dealt. And then,
in this odd, serene state of contentment brought on by the seeming
emancipation from despising everyone at Athena who, deliberately
and in bad faith, had misjudged, misused, and besmirched him—
had plunged him, for two years, into a misanthropic exertion of
Swiftian proportions—he began to rhapsodize about the great by-
gone days when his cup ranneth over and his considerable talent
for conscientiousness was spent garnering and tendering pleasure.

Now that he was no longer grounded in his hate, we were going

to talk about women. This was a new Coleman. Or perhaps an
old Coleman, the oldest adult Coleman there was, the most satis-
fied Coleman there had ever been. Not Coleman pre-spooks and
unmaligned as a racist, but the Coleman contaminated by desire
alone.

"I came out of the navy, I got a place in the Village," he began to

tell me as he assembled his hand, "and all I had to do was go down
into the subway. It was like fishing down there. Go down into the
subway and come up with a girl. And then"—he stopped to pick up
my discard—"all at once, got my degree, got married, got my job,
kids, and that was the end of the fishing."

"Never fished again."
"Almost never. True. Virtually never. As good as never. Hear these

songs?" The four radios were playing in the house, and so even out
on the road it would have been impossible not to hear them. "After
the war, those were the songs," he said. "Four, five years of the
songs, the girls, and that fulfilled my every ideal. I found a letter to-
day. Cleaning out that Spooks stuff, found a letter from one of the
girls. The girl. After I got my first appointment, out on Long Island,
out at Adelphi, and Iris was pregnant with Jeff, this letter arrived. A
girl nearly six feet tall. Iris was a big girl too. But not big like Steena.
Iris was substantial. Steena was something else. Steena sent me this
letter in 1954 and it turned up today while I was shoveling out the
files."

From the back pocket of his shorts, Coleman pulled the original

envelope holding Steena's letter. He was still without a T-shirt,
which now that we were out of the kitchen and on the porch I
couldn't help but take note of—it was a warm July night, but not
that warm. He had never struck me before as a man whose consid-
erable vanity extended also to his anatomy. But now there seemed
to me to be something more than a mere at-homeness expressed in
this exhibition of his body's suntanned surface. On display were the
shoulders, arms, and chest of a smallish man still trim and attrac-
tive, a belly no longer flat, to be sure, but nothing that had gotten
seriously out of hand—altogether the physique of someone who
would seem to have been a cunning and wily competitor at sports
rather than an overpowering one. And all this had previously been
concealed from me, because he was always shirted and also because
of his having been so drastically consumed by his rage.

Also previously concealed was the small, Popeye-ish, blue tattoo

situated at the top of his right arm, just at the shoulder joining—

the words "U.S. Navy" inscribed between the hooklike arms of a
shadowy little anchor and running along the hypotenuse of the
deltoid muscle. A tiny symbol, if one were needed, of all the million
circumstances of the other fellow's life, of that blizzard of details
that constitute the confusion of a human biography—a tiny sym-
bol to remind me why our understanding of people must always be
at best slightly wrong.

"Kept it? The letter? Still got it?" I said. "Must've been some

letter."

"A killing letter. Something had happened to me that I hadn't

understood until that letter. I was married, responsibly employed,
we were going to have a child, and yet I hadn't understood that the
Steenas were over. Got this letter and I realized that the serious
things had really begun, the serious life dedicated to serious things.
My father owned a saloon off Grove Street in East Orange. You're a
Weequahic boy, you don't know East Orange. It was the poor end of
town. He was one of those Jewish saloon keepers, they were all over
Jersey and, of course, they all had ties to the Reinfelds and to the
Mob—they had to have, to survive the Mob. My father wasn't a
roughneck but he was rough enough, and he wanted better for me.
He dropped dead my last year of high school. I was the only child.
The adored one. He wouldn't even let me work in his place when
the types there began to entertain me. Everything in life, includ-
ing the saloon—beginning with the saloon—was always pushing
me to be a serious student, and, back in those days, studying my
high school Latin, taking advanced Latin, taking Greek, which was
still part of the old-fashioned curriculum, the saloon keeper's kid
couldn't have tried harder to be any more serious."

There was some quick by-play between us and Coleman laid

down his cards to show me his winning hand. As I started to deal,
he resumed the story. I'd never heard it before. I'd never heard any-
thing before other than how he'd come by his hatred for the college.

"Well," he said, "once I'd fulfilled my father's dream and become

an ultra-respectable college professor, I thought, as my father did,
that the serious life would now never end. That it could never end

once you had the credentials. But it ended, Nathan. 'Or are they
spooks?' and I'm out on my ass. When Roberts was here he liked to
tell people that my success as a dean flowed from learning my man-
ners in a saloon. President Roberts with his upper-class pedigree
liked that he had this barroom brawler parked just across the hall
from him. In front of the old guard particularly, Roberts pretended
to enjoy me for my background, though, as we know, Gentiles actu-
ally hate those stories about the Jews and their remarkable rise from
the slums. Yes, there was a certain amount of mockery in Pierce
Roberts, and even then, yes, when I think about it, starting even
then ..." But here he reined himself in. Wouldn't go on with it. He
was finished with the derangement of being the monarch deposed.
The grievance that will never die is hereby declared dead.
Back to Steena. Remembering Steena helps enormously.

"Met her in '48," he said. "I was twenty-two, on the GI Bill at

NYU, the navy behind me, and she was eighteen and only a few
months in New York. Had some kind of job there and was going to
college, too, but at night. Independent girl from Minnesota. Sure-
of-herself girl, or seemed so. Danish on one side, Icelandic on the
other. Quick. Smart. Pretty. Tall. Marvelously tall. That statuesque
recumbency. Never forgotten it. With her for two years. Used to call
her Voluptas. Psyche's daughter. The personification to the Romans
of sensual pleasure."

Now he put down his cards, picked up the envelope from where

he'd dropped it beside the discard pile, and pulled out the letter. A
typewritten letter a couple of pages long. "We'd run into each other.
I was in from Adelphi, in the city for the day, and there was Steena,
about twenty-four, twenty-five by then. We stopped and spoke, and
I told her my wife was pregnant, and she told me what she was do-
ing, and then we kissed goodbye, and that was it. About a week later
this letter came to me care of the college. It's dated. She dated it.
Here—'August 18,1954.' 'Dear Coleman,' she says, 'I was very happy
to see you in New York. Brief as our meeting was, after I saw you I
felt an autumnal sadness, perhaps because the six years since we
first met make it wrenchingly obvious how many days of my life are

"over." You look very good, and I'm glad you're happy. You were
also very gentlemanly. You didn't swoop. Which is the one thing
you did (or seemed to do) when I first met you and you rented the
basement room on Sullivan Street. Do you remember yourself? You
were incredibly good at swooping, almost like birds do when they
fly over land or sea and spy something moving, something bursting
with life, and dive down—or zero in—and seize upon it. I was as-
tonished, when we met, by your flying energy. I remember being in
your room the first time and, when I arrived, I sat in a chair, and
you were walking around the room from place to place, occasion-
ally stopping to perch on a stool or the couch. You had a ratty Sal-
vation Army couch where you slept before we chipped in for The
Mattress. You offered me a drink, which you handed to me while
scrutinizing me with an air of incredible wonder and curiosity, as if
it were some kind of miracle that I had hands and could hold a
glass, or that I had a mouth which might drink from it, or that I had
even materialized at all, in your room, a day after we'd met on the
subway. You were talking, asking questions, sometimes answering
questions, in a deadly serious and yet hilarious way, and I was try-
ing very hard to talk also but conversation was not coming as easily
to me. So there I was staring back at you, absorbing and under-
standing far more than I expected to understand. But I couldn't
find words to speak to fill the space created by the fact that you
seemed attracted to me and that I was attracted to you. I kept
thinking, "I'm not ready. I just arrived in this city. Not now. But I
will be, with a little more time, a few more exchanged notes of con-
versation, if I can think what I wish to say." ("Ready" for what, I
don't know. Not just making love. Ready to be.) But then you
"swooped," Coleman, nearly halfway across the room, to where I
was sitting, and I was flabbergasted but delighted. It was too soon,
but it wasn't.'"

He stopped reading when he heard, coming from the radio, the

first bars of "Bewitched, Bothered, and Bewildered" being sung by
Sinatra. "I've got to dance," Coleman said. "Want to dance?"
I laughed. No, this was not the savage, embittered, embattled

avenger of Spooks, estranged from life and maddened by it—this

was not even another man. This was another soul. A boyish soul at
that. I got a strong picture then, both from Steena's letter and from
Coleman, shirtless, as he was reading it, of what Coleman Silk had
once been like. Before becoming a revolutionary dean, before be-
coming a serious classics professor—and long before becoming
Athena's pariah—he had been not only a studious boy but a
charming and seductive boy as well. Excited. Mischievous. A bit de-
monic even, a snub-nosed, goat-footed Pan. Once upon a time, be-
fore the serious things took over completely.

"After I hear the rest of the letter," I replied to the invitation to

dance. "Read me the rest of Steena's letter."

"Three months out of Minnesota when we met. Just went down

into the subway and brought her up with me. Well," he said, "that
was 1948 for you,'" and he turned back to her letter. "'I was quite
taken with you,'" he read, "'but I was concerned you might find me
too young, an uninteresting midwestern bland sort of girl, and be-
sides, you were dating someone "smart and nice and lovely" al-
ready, though you added, with a sly smile, "I don't believe she and I
will get married." "Why not?" I asked. "I may be getting bored," you
answered, thereby ensuring that I would do anything I could think
of not to bore you, including dropping out of contact, if necessary,
so as to avoid the risk of becoming boring. Well, that's it. That's
enough. I shouldn't even bother you. I promise I won't ever again.
Take care. Take care. Take care. Take care. Very fondly, Steena.'"

"Well," I said, "that is 1948 for you."
"Come. Let's dance."
"But you mustn't sing into my ear."
"Come on. Get up."
What the hell, I thought, we'll both be dead soon enough, and so

I got up, and there on the porch Coleman Silk and I began to dance
the fox trot together. He led, and, as best I could, I followed. I re-
membered that day he'd burst into my studio after making burial
arrangements for Iris and, out of his mind with grief and rage, told
me that I had to write for him the book about all the unbelievable

absurdities of his case, culminating in the murder of his wife. One
would have thought that never again would this man have a taste
for the foolishness of life, that all that was playful in him and light-
hearted had been destroyed and lost, right along with the career,
the reputation, and the formidable wife. Maybe why it didn't even
cross my mind to laugh and let him, if he wanted to, dance around
the porch by himself, just laugh and enjoy myself watching him—
maybe why I gave him my hand and let him place his arm around
my back and push me dreamily around that old bluestone floor was
because I had been there that day when her corpse was still warm
and seen what he'd looked like.

"I hope nobody from the volunteer fire department drives by," I

said.

"Yeah," he said. "We don't want anybody tapping me on the

shoulder and asking, 'May I cut in?'"

On we danced. There was nothing overtly carnal in it, but be-

cause Coleman was wearing only his denim shorts and my hand
rested easily on his warm back as if it were the back of a dog or a
horse, it wasn't entirely a mocking act. There was a semi-serious
sincerity in his guiding me about on the stone floor, not to mention
a thoughtless delight in just being alive, accidentally and clownishly
and for no reason alive—the kind of delight you take as a child
when you first learn to play a tune with a comb and toilet paper.

It was when we sat down that Coleman told me about the

woman. "I'm having an affair, Nathan. I'm having an affair with a
thirty-four-year-old woman. I can't tell you what it's done to me."

"We just finished dancing—you don't have to."
"I thought I couldn't take any more of anything. But when this

stuff comes back so late in life, out of nowhere, completely unex-
pected, even unwanted, comes back at you and there's nothing to
dilute it with, when you're no longer striving on twenty-two fronts,
no longer deep in the daily disorder... when it's just this..."

"And when she's thirty-four."
"And ignitable. An ignitable woman. She's turned sex into a vice

again."

"'La Belle Dame sans Merci hath thee in thrall.'"
"Seems so. I say, 'What is it like for you with somebody seventy-

one?' and she tells me, 'It's perfect with somebody seventy-one.
He's set in his ways and he can't change. You know what he is. No
surprises.'"

"What's made her so wise?"
"Surprises. Thirty-four years of savage surprises have given her

wisdom. But it's a very narrow, antisocial wisdom. It's savage, too.
It's the wisdom of somebody who expects nothing. That's her wis-
dom, and that's her dignity, but it's negative wisdom, and that's not
the kind that keeps you on course day to day. This is a woman
whose life's been trying to grind her down almost for as long as
she's had life. Whatever she's learned comes from that."

I thought, He's found somebody he can talk with ... and then I

thought, So have I. The moment a man starts to tell you about sex,
he's telling you something about the two of you. Ninety percent of
the time it doesn't happen, and probably it's as well it doesn't,
though if you can't get a level of candor on sex and you choose to
behave instead as if this isn't ever on your mind, the male friend-
ship is incomplete. Most men never find such a friend. It's not com-
mon. But when it does happen, when two men find themselves
in agreement about this essential part of being a man, unafraid
of being judged, shamed, envied, or outdone, confident of not
having the confidence betrayed, their human connection can be
very strong and an unexpected intimacy results. This probably isn't
usual for him, I was thinking, but because he'd come to me in his
worst moment, full of the hatred that I'd watched poison him over
the months, he feels the freedom of being with someone who's seen
you through a terrible illness from the side of your bed. He feels not
so much the urge to brag as the enormous relief of not having to
keep something so bewilderingly new as his own rebirth totally to
himself.

"Where did you find her?" I asked.
"I went to pick up my mail at the end of the day and there she

was, mopping the floor. She's the skinny blonde who sometimes

cleans out the post office. She's on the regular janitorial staff at
Athena. She's a full-time janitor where I was once dean. The woman
has nothing. Faunia Farley. That's her name. Faunia has absolutely
nothing."

"Why has she nothing?"
"She had a husband. He beat her so badly she ended up in a

coma. They had a dairy farm. He ran it so badly it went bankrupt.
She had two children. A space heater tipped over, caught fire, and
both children were asphyxiated. Aside from the ashes of the two
children that she keeps in a canister under her bed, she owns noth-
ing of value except an '83 Chevy. The only time I've seen her come
close to crying was when she told me, 'I don't know what to do with
the ashes.' Rural disaster has squeezed Faunia dry of even her tears.
And she began life a rich, privileged kid. Brought up in a big
sprawling house south of Boston. Fireplaces in the five bedrooms,
the best antiques, heirloom china—everything old and the best, the
family included. She can be surprisingly well spoken if she wants to
be. But she's dropped so far down the social ladder from so far up
that by now she's a pretty mixed bag of verbal beans. .Faunia's been
exiled from the entitlement that should have been hers. Declassed.
There's a real democratization to her suffering."

"What undid her?"
"A stepfather undid her. Upper-bourgeois evil undid her. There

was a divorce when she was five. The prosperous father caught the
beautiful mother having an affair. The mother liked money, remar-
ried money, and the rich stepfather wouldn't leave Faunia alone.
Fondling her from the day he arrived. Couldn't stay away from her.
This blond angelic child, fondling her, fingering her—it's when he
tried fucking her that she ran away. She was fourteen. The mother
refused to believe her. They took her to a psychiatrist. Faunia told
the psychiatrist what happened, and after ten sessions the psychia-
trist too sided with the stepfather. 'Takes the side of those who pay
him,' Faunia says. 'Just like everyone.' The mother had an affair with
the psychiatrist afterward. That is the story, as she reports it, of
what launched her into the life of a tough having to make her way

on her own. Ran away from home, from high school, went down
south, worked there, came back up this way, got whatever work she
could, and at twenty married this farmer, older than herself, a dairy
farmer, a Vietnam vet, thinking that if they worked hard and raised
kids and made the farm work she could have a stable, ordinary life,
even if the guy was on the dumb side. Especially if he was on the
dumb side. She thought she might be better off being the one with
the brains. She thought that was her advantage. She was wrong. All
they had together was trouble. The farm failed. 'Jerk-off,' she tells
me, 'bought one tractor too many.' And regularly beat her up. Beat
her black and blue. You know what she presents as the high point of
the marriage? The event she calls 'the great warm shit fight.' One
evening they are in the barn after the milking arguing about some-
thing, and a cow next to her takes a big shit, and Faunia picks up a
handful and flings it in Lester's face. He flings a handful back, and
that's how it started. She said to me, 'The warm shit fight may have
been the best time we had together.' At the end, they were covered
with cow shit and roaring with laughter, and, after washing off with
the hose in the barn, they went up to the house to fuck. But that
was carrying a good thing too far. That wasn't one-hundredth of
the fun of the fight. Fucking Lester wasn't ever fun—according to
Faunia, he didn't know how to do it. 'Too dumb even to fuck right.'
When she tells me that I am the perfect man, I tell her that I see how
that might seem so to her, coming to me after him."

"And fighting the Lesters of life with warm shit since she's four-

teen has made her what at thirty-four," I asked, "aside from savagely
wise? Tough? Shrewd? Enraged? Crazy?"

"The fighting life has made her tough, certainly sexually tough,

but it hasn't made her crazy. At least I don't think so yet. Enraged? If
it's there—and why wouldn't it be?—it's a furtive rage. Rage with-
out the rage. And, for someone who seems to have lived entirely
without luck, there's no lament in her—none she shows to me, any-
way. But as for shrewd, no. She says things sometimes that sound
shrewd. She says, 'Maybe you ought to think of me as a companion
of equal age who happens to look younger. I think that's where

I'm at.' When I asked, 'What do you want from me?' she said, 'Some
companionship. Maybe some knowledge. Sex. Pleasure. Don't
worry. That's it.' When I told her once she was wise beyond her
years, she told me, 'I'm dumb beyond my years.' She was sure
smarter than Lester, but shrewd? No. Something in Faunia is per-
manently fourteen and as far as you can get from shrewd. She had
an affair with her boss, the guy who hired her. Smoky Hollenbeck. I
hired him—guy who runs the college's physical plant. Smoky used
to be a football star here. Back in the seventies I knew him as a stu-
dent. Now he's a civil engineer. He hires Faunia for the custodial
staff, and even while he's hiring her, she understands what's on his
mind. The guy is attracted to her. He's locked into an unexciting
marriage, but he's not angry with her about it—he's not looking at
her disdainfully, thinking, Why haven't you settled down, why are
you still tramping and whoring around? No bourgeois superiority
from Smoky. Smoky is doing all the right things and doing them
beautifully—a wife, kids, five kids, married as a man can be, a
sports hero still around the college, popular and admired in
town—but he has a gift: he can also step outside of that. You
wouldn't believe it to talk to him. Mr. Athena Square squared, per-
forming in every single way he is supposed to perform. Appears to
have bought into the story of himself one hundred percent. You
would expect him to think, This stupid bitch with her fucked-up
life? Get her the fuck out of my office. But he doesn't. Unlike every-
one else in Athena, he is not so caught up in the legend of Smoky
that he is incapable of thinking, Yeah, this is a real cunt I'd like to
fuck. Or incapable of acting. He fucks her, Nathan. Gets Faunia in
bed with him and another of the women from the custodial staff.
Fucks 'em together. Goes on for six months. Then a real estate
woman, newly divorced, fresh on the local scene, she joins the act.
Smoky's circus. Smoky's secret three-ring circus. But then, after six
months, he drops her—takes Faunia out of the rotation and drops
her. I knew nothing about any of this till she told me. And she only
told me because one night in bed, her eyes roll back into her head
and she calls me by his name. Whispers to me, 'Smoky.' On top of

old Smoky. Her being with him in that ménage gave me a better
idea of the dame I was dealing with. Upped the ante. Gave me a jolt,
actually—this is no amateur. When I ask her how Smoky manages
to attract his hordes, she tells me, 'By the force of his prick.' 'Ex-
plain,' I say, and she tells me, 'You know how when a real cunt walks
into a room, a man knows it? Well, the same thing happens the
other way round. With certain people, no matter what the disguise,
you understand what they're there to do.' In bed is the only place
where Faunia is in any way shrewd, Nathan. A spontaneous physi-
cal shrewdness plays the leading role in bed—second lead played by
transgressive audacity. In bed nothing escapes Faunia's attention.
Her flesh has eyes. Her flesh sees everything. In bed she is a power-
ful, coherent, unified being whose pleasure is in overstepping the
boundaries. In bed she is a deep phenomenon. Maybe that's a gift
of the molestation. When we go downstairs to the kitchen, when I
scramble some eggs and we sit there eating together, she's a kid.
Maybe that's a gift of the molestation too. I am in the company of a
blank-eyed, distracted, incoherent kid. This happens nowhere else.
But whenever we eat, there it is: me and my kid. Seems to be all the
daughter that's left in her. She can't sit up straight in her chair, she
can't string two sentences together having anything to do with each
other. All the seeming nonchalance about sex and tragedy, all of
that disappears, and I'm sitting there wanting to say to her, 'Pull
yourself up to the table, get the sleeve of my bathrobe out of your
plate, try to listen to what I'm saying, and look at me, damn it,
when you speak.'"

"Do you say it?"
"Doesn't seem advisable. No, I don't—not as long as I prefer to

preserve the intensity of what is there. I think of that canister under
her bed, where she keeps the ashes she doesn't know what to do
with, and I want to say, 'It's two years. It's time to bury them. If you
can't put them in the ground, then go down to the river and shake
out the ashes from the bridge. Let them float off. Let them go. I'll go
do it with you. We'll do it together.' But I am not the father to this
daughter—that's not the role I play here. I'm not her professor. I'm

not anyone's professor. From teaching people, correcting people,
advising and examining and enlightening people, I am retired. I am
a seventy-one-year-old man with a thirty-four-year-old mistress;
this disqualifies me, in the commonwealth of Massachusetts, from
enlightening anyone. I'm taking Viagra, Nathan. There's La Belle
Dame sans Merci. I owe all of this turbulence and happiness to
Viagra. Without Viagra none of this would be happening. Without
Viagra I would have a picture of the world appropriate to my age
and wholly different aims. Without Viagra I would have the dignity
of an elderly gentleman free from desire who behaves correctly. I
would not be doing something that makes no sense. I would not be
doing something unseemly, rash, ill considered, and potentially di-
sastrous for all involved. Without Viagra, I could continue, in my
declining years, to develop the broad impersonal perspective of an
experienced and educated honorably discharged man who has long
ago given up the sensual enjoyment of life. I could continue to draw
profound philosophical conclusions and have a steadying moral
influence on the young, instead of having put myself back into the
perpetual state of emergency that is sexual intoxication. Thanks to
Viagra I've come to understand Zeus's amorous transformations.
That's what they should have called Viagra. They should have called
it Zeus."

But he's too enlivened by it all to stop. The impulse is the same
one that drove him to dance with me. Yes, I thought, it's no longer
writing Spooks that's the defiant rebound from humiliation; it's
fucking Faunia. But there's more even than that driving him.
There's the wish to let the brute out, let that force out—for half
an hour, for two hours, for whatever, to be freed into the natural
thing. He was married a long time. He had kids. He was the dean
at a college. For forty years he was doing what was necessary to
do. He was busy, and the natural thing that is the brute was moved
into a box. And now that box is opened. Being a dean, being a
father, being a husband, being a scholar, a teacher, reading the
books, giving the lectures, marking the papers, giving the grades,

EVERYONE  KNOWS

it's over. At seventy-one you're not the high-spirited, horny brute
you were at twenty-six, of course. But the remnants of the brute,
the remnants of the natural thing—he is in touch now with the
remnants. And he's happy as a result, he's grateful to be in touch
with the remnants. He's more than happy—he's thrilled, and he's
bound, deeply bound to her already, because of the thrill. It's not
family that's doing it—biology has no use for him anymore. It's not
family, it's not responsibility, it's not duty, it's not money, it's not a
shared philosophy or the love of literature, it's not big discussions
of great ideas. No, what binds him to her is the thrill. Tomorrow he
develops cancer, and boom. But today he has this thrill.

Why is he telling me? Because to be able to abandon oneself to

this freely, someone has to know it. He's free to be abandoned, I
thought, because there's nothing at stake. Because there is no fu-
ture. Because he's seventy-one and she's thirty-four. He's in it not
for learning, not for planning, but for adventure; he's in it as she is:
for the ride. He's been given a lot of license by those thirty-seven
years. An old man and, one last time, the sexual charge. What is
more moving for anybody?

"Of course I have to ask," Coleman said, "what she's doing with

me. What is really going through her mind? An exciting new expe-
rience for her, to be with a man as old as her grandfather?"

"I suppose there is that type of woman," I said, "for whom it is an

exciting experience. There's every other type, why shouldn't there
be that type? Look, there is obviously a department somewhere,
Coleman, a federal agency that deals with old men, and she comes
from that agency."

"As a young guy," Coleman told me, "I was never involved with

ugly women. But in the navy I had a friend, Farriello, and ugly
women were his specialty. Down at Norfolk, if we went to a dance
at a church, if we went at night to the USO, Farriello made a beeline
for the ugliest girl. When I laughed at him, he told me I didn't know
what I was missing. They're frustrated, he told me. They're not as
beautiful, he told me, as the empresses you choose, so they'll do
whatever you want. Most men are stupid, he said, because they

don't know this. They don't understand that if only you approach
the ugliest woman, she is the one who is the most extraordinary. If
you can open her up, that is. But if you succeed? If you succeed in
opening her up, you don't know what to do first, she is vibrating so.
And all because she's ugly. Because she is never chosen. Because she
is in the corner when all the other girls dance. And that's what it's
like to be an old man. To be like that ugly girl. To be in the corner at
the dance."

"So Faunia's your Farriello."
He smiled. "More or less."
"Well, whatever else may be going on," I told him, "thanks to

Viagra you're no longer suffering the torture of writing that book."

"I think that's so," Coleman said. "I think that's true. That stupid

book. And did I tell you that Faunia can't read? I found this out
when we drove up to Vermont one night for dinner. Couldn't read
the menu. Tossed it aside. She has a way, when she wants to look
properly contemptuous, of lifting just a half of her upper lip, lifting
it a hair, and then speaking what's on her mind. Properly contemp-
tuous, she says to the waitress, 'Whatever he has, ditto.'"

"She went to school until she was fourteen. How come she can't

read?"

"The ability to read seems to have perished right along with the

childhood when she learned how. I asked her how this could hap-
pen, but all she did was laugh. 'Easy,' she says. The good liberals
down at Athena are trying to encourage her to enter a literacy pro-
gram, but Faunia's not having it. 'And don't you try to teach me. Do
anything you want with me, anything,' she told me that night, 'but
don't pull that shit. Bad enough having to hear people speak. Start
teaching me to read, force me into that, push reading on me, and
it'll be you who push me over the edge.' All the way back from Ver-
mont, I was silent, and so was she. Not until we reached the house
did we utter a word to each other. 'You're not up to fucking some-
body who can't read,' she said. 'You're going to drop me because I'm
not a worthy, legitimate person who reads. You're going to say to
me, 'Learn to read or go.' 'No,' I told her, 'I'm going to fuck you all

the harder because you can't read.' 'Good,' she said, 'we understand
each other. I don't do it like those literate girls and I don't want to
be done to like them.' 'I'm going to fuck you,' I said, 'for just what
you are.' 'That's the ticket,' she says. We were both laughing by
then. Faunia's got the laugh of a barmaid who keeps a baseball bat
at her feet in case of trouble, and so she was laughing that laugh of
hers, that scrappy, I've-seen-it-all laugh—you know, the coarse,
easy laugh of the woman with a past—and by then she's unzipping
my fly. But she was right on the money about my having decided to
give her up. All the way back from Vermont I was thinking exactly
what she said I was thinking. But I'm not going to do that. I'm not
going to impose my wonderful virtue on her. Or on myself. That's
over. I know these things don't come without a cost. I know that
there's no insurance you can buy on this. I know how the thing
that's restoring you can wind up killing you. I know that every mis-
take that a man can make usually has a sexual accelerator. But right
now I happen not to care. I wake up in the morning, there's a towel
on the floor, there's baby oil on the bedside table. How did all that
get there? Then I remember. Got there because I'm alive again. Be-
cause I'm back in the tornado. Because this is what it is with a capital
isness. I'm not going to give her up, Nathan. I've started to call her
Voluptas."

As a result of surgery I had several years ago to remove my pros-
tate—cancer surgery that, though successful, was not without the
adverse aftereffects almost unavoidable in such operations because
of nerve damage and internal scarring—I've been left incontinent,
and so, the first thing I did when I got home from Coleman's was to
dispose of the absorbent cotton pad that I wear night and day,
slipped inside the crotch of my underwear the way a hot dog lies in
a roll. Because of the heat that evening, and because I wasn't going
out to a public place or a social gathering, I'd tried to get by with
ordinary cotton briefs pulled on over the pad instead of the plastic
ones, and the result was that the urine had seeped through to my
khaki trousers. I discovered when I got home that the trousers were

THE  HUMAN   STAIN

discolored at the front and that I smelled a little—the pads are
treated, but there was, on this occasion, an odor. I'd been so en-
gaged by Coleman and his story that I'd failed to monitor myself.
All the while I was there, drinking a beer, dancing with him, attend-
ing to the clarity—the predictable rationality and descriptive clar-
ity—with which he worked to make less unsettling to himself this
turn that life had taken, I hadn't gone off to check myself, as ordi-
narily I do during my waking hours, and so, what from time to time
now happens to me happened that night.

No, a mishap like this one doesn't throw me as much as it used to

when, in the months after the surgery, I was first experimenting
with the ways of handling the problem—and when, of course, I was
habituated to being a free and easy, dry and odorless adult possess-
ing an adult's mastery of the body's elementary functions, someone
who for some sixty years had gone about his everyday business un-
worried about the status of his underclothes. Yet I do suffer at least
a pang of distress when I have to deal with something messier than
the ordinary inconvenience that is now a part of my life, and I still
despair to think that the contingency that virtually defines the in-
fant state will never be alleviated.

I was also left impotent by the surgery. The drug therapy that was

practically brand-new in the summer of 1998 and that had already,
in its short time on the market, proved to be something like a mi-
raculous elixir, restoring functional potency to many otherwise
healthy, elderly men like Coleman, was of no use to me because of
the extensive nerve damage done by the operation. For conditions
like mine Viagra could do nothing, though even had it proved help-
ful, I don't believe I would have taken it.

reclusive existence. To the contrary. I'd already been living and
writing for some eighteen months in my two-room cabin up here
in the Berkshires when, following a routine physical exam, I re-
ceived a preliminary diagnosis of prostate cancer and, a month
later, after the follow-up tests, went to Boston for the prostatec-
tomy. My point is that by moving here I had altered deliberately my

EVERYONE  KNOWS

relationship to the sexual caterwaul, and not because the exhorta-
tions or, for that matter, my erections had been effectively weak-
ened by time, but because I couldn't meet the costs of its clamoring
anymore, could no longer marshal the wit, the strength, the pa-
tience, the illusion, the irony, the ardor, the egoism, the resilience—
or the toughness, or the shrewdness, or the falseness, the dissem-
bling, the dual being, the erotic professionalism—to deal with its ar-
ray of misleading and contradictory meanings. As a result, I was
able to lessen a little my postoperative shock at the prospect of per-
manent impotence by remembering that all the surgery had done
was to make me hold to a renunciation to which I had already vol-
untarily submitted. The operation did no more than to enforce
with finality a decision I'd come to on my own, under the pressure
of a lifelong experience of entanglements but in a time of full, vig-
orous, and restless potency, when the venturesome masculine ma-
nia to repeat the act—repeat it and repeat it and repeat it—re-
mained undeterred by physiological problems.

It wasn't until Coleman told me about himself and his Volup-

tas that all the comforting delusions about the serenity achieved
through enlightened resignation vanished, and I completely lost
my equilibrium. Well into the morning I lay awake, powerless as a
lunatic to control my thinking, hypnotized by the other couple and
comparing them to my own washed-out state. I lay awake not even
trying to prevent myself from mentally reconstructing the "trans-
gressive audacity" Coleman was refusing to relinquish. And my
having danced around like a harmless eunuch with this still vital,
potent participant in the frenzy struck me now as anything but
charming self-satire.

How can one say, "No, this isn't a part of life," since it always is?

The contaminant of sex, the redeeming corruption that de-idealizes
the species and keeps us everlastingly mindful of the matter we are.

In the middle of the next week, Coleman got the anonymous letter,
one sentence long, subject, predicate, and pointed modifiers boldly
inscribed in a large hand across a single sheet of white typing paper,

THE  HUMAN  STAIN

the twelve-word message, intended as an indictment, filling the
sheet from top to bottom:

Everyone knows you're
sexually exploiting an

abused, illiterate
woman half your

age.

The writing on both the envelope and the letter was in red ball-

point ink. Despite the envelope's New York City postmark, Cole-
man recognized the handwriting immediately as that of the young
French woman who'd been his department chair when he'd re-
turned to teaching after stepping down from the deanship and who,
later, had been among those most eager to have him exposed as a
racist and reprimanded for the insult he had leveled at his absent
black students.

In his Spooks files, on several of the documents generated by his

case, he found samples of handwriting that confirmed his identi-
fication of Professor Delphine Roux, of Languages and Literature,
as the anonymous letter writer. Aside from her having printed
rather than written in script the first couple of words, she hadn't
made any effort that Coleman could see to put him off the trail by
falsifying her hand. She might have begun with that intention but
appeared to have abandoned it or forgotten about it after getting no
further than "Everyone knows." On the envelope, the French-born
professor hadn't even bothered to eschew the telltale European sev-
ens in Coleman's street address and zip code. This laxness, an odd
disregard—in an anonymous letter—for concealing the signs of
one's identity, might have been explained by some extreme emo-
tional state she was in that hadn't allowed her to think through
what she was doing before firing off the letter, except that it hadn't
been posted locally—and hastily—but appeared from the post-
mark to have been transported some hundred and forty miles
south before being mailed. Maybe she had figured that there was
nothing distinctive or eccentric enough in her handwriting for him

EVERYONE   KNOWS

to be able to recognize it from his days as dean; maybe she had
failed to remember the documents pertaining to his case, the notes
of her two interviews with Tracy Cummings that she had passed on
to the faculty investigating committee along with the final report
that bore her signature. Perhaps she didn't realize that, at Cole-
man's request, the committee had provided him with a photocopy
of her original notes and all the other data pertinent to the com-
plaint against him. Or maybe she didn't care if he did determine
who out there had uncovered his secret: maybe she wanted both to
taunt him with the menacing aggressiveness of an anonymous in-
dictment and, at the same time, to all but disclose that the indict-
ment had been brought by someone now far from powerless.

The afternoon Coleman called and asked me to come over to see

the anonymous letter, all the samples of Delphine Roux's handwrit-
ing from the Spooks files were neatly laid out on the kitchen table,
both the originals and copies of the originals that he'd already run
off and on which he'd circled, in red, every stroke of the pen that he
saw as replicating the strokes in the anonymous letter. Marked off
mainly were letters in isolation—a y, an s, an x, here a word-ending
e with a wide loop, here an e looking something like an i when nes-
tled up against an adjacent d but more like a conventionally written
e when preceding an r—and, though the similarities in writing
between the letter and the Spooks documents were noteworthy, it
wasn't until he showed me where his full name appeared on the en-
velope and where it appeared in her interview notes with Tracy
Cummings that it seemed to me indisputable that he had nailed the
culprit who'd set out to nail him.

Everyone knows you're
sexually exploiting an

abused, illiterate
woman half your

age.

While I held the letter in my hand and as carefully as I could—

and as Coleman would have me do—appraised the choice of words

and their linear deployment as if they'd been composed not by
Delphine Roux but by Emily Dickinson, Coleman explained to me
that it was Faunia, out of that savage wisdom of hers, and not he
who had sworn them both to the secrecy that Delphine Roux had
somehow penetrated and was more or less threatening to expose. "I
don't want anybody butting in my life. All I want is a no-pressure
bang once a week, on the sly, with a man who's been through it all
and is nicely cooled out. Otherwise it's nobody's fucking business."

The nobody Faunia turned out mostly to be referring to was

Lester Farley, her ex-husband. Not that she'd been knocked around
in her life by this man alone—"How could I be, being out there on
my own since I was fourteen?" When she was seventeen, for exam-
ple, and down in Florida waitressing, the then-boyfriend not only
beat her up and trashed her apartment, he stole her vibrator. "That
hurt," Faunia said. And always, the provocation was jealousy. She'd
looked at another man the wrong way, she'd invited another man to
look at her the wrong way, she hadn't explained convincingly where
she'd been for the previous half hour, she'd spoken the wrong word,
used the wrong intonation, signaled, unsubstantially, she thought,
that she was an untrustworthy two-timing slut—whatever the rea-
son, whoever he might be would be over her swinging his fists and
kicking his boots and Faunia would be screaming for her life.

Lester Farley had sent her to the hospital twice in the year before

their divorce, and as he was still living somewhere in the hills and,
since the bankruptcy, working for the town road crew, and as there
was no doubting that he was still crazy, she was as frightened for
Coleman, she said, as she was for herself, should he ever discover
what was going on. She suspected that why Smoky had so precipi-
tously dumped her was because of some sort of run-in or brush
he'd had with Les Farley—because Les, a periodic stalker of his ex-
wife, had somehow found out about her and her boss, even though
Hollenbeck's trysting places were remarkably well hidden, tucked
away in remote corners of old buildings that no one but the boss of
the college physical plant could possibly know existed or have ac-
cess to. Reckless as it might seem for Smoky to be recruiting girl-

friends from his own custodial staff and then to be rendezvousing
with them right on campus, he was otherwise as meticulous in the
management of his sporting life as he was in his work for the col-
lege. With the same professional dispatch that could get the campus
roads cleared of a blizzard in a matter of hours, he could, if need be,
equally expeditiously rid himself of one of his girls.

"So what do I do?" Coleman asked me. "I wasn't against keeping

this thing concealed even before I'd heard about the violent ex-hus-
band. I knew that something like this was coming. Forget that I was
once the dean where she now cleans the toilets. I'm seventy-one
and she's thirty-four. I could count on that alone to do it, I was sure,
and so, when she told me that it was nobody's business, I figured,
She's taken it out of my hands. I don't even have to broach the sub-
ject. Play it like adultery? Fine with me. That's why we went for din-
ner up in Vermont. That's why if our paths cross at the post office,
we don't even bother to say hello."

"Maybe somebody saw you in Vermont. Maybe somebody saw

you driving together in your car."

"True—that's probably what happened. That's all that could have

happened. It might have been Farley himself who saw us. Christ,
Nathan, I hadn't been on a date in almost fifty years—I thought the
restaurant... I'm an idiot."

"No, it wasn't idiocy. No, no—you just got claustrophobic.

Look," I said, "Delphine Roux—I won't pretend I understand why
she should care so passionately who you are screwing in your re-
tirement, but since we know that other people don't do well with
somebody who fails at being conventional, let's assume that she is
one of these other people. But you're not. You're free. A free and in-
dependent man. A free and independent old man. You lost plenty
quitting that place, but what about what you've gained? It's no
longer your job to enlighten anyone—you said as much yourself.
Nor is this a test of whether you can or cannot rid yourself of every
last social inhibition. You may now be retired but you're a man who
led virtually the whole of life within the bounds of the communal
academic society—if I read you right, this is a most unusual thing

for you. Perhaps you never wanted Faunia to have happened. You
may even believe that you shouldn't want her to have happened.
But the strongest defenses are riddled with weakness, and so in slips
the last thing in the world you expected. At seventy-one, there is
Faunia; in 1998, there is Viagra; there once again is the all-but-for-
gotten thing. The enormous comfort. The crude power. The disori-
enting intensity. Out of nowhere, Coleman Silk's last great fling.
For all we know, the last great last-minute fling. So the particulars
of Faunia Farley's biography form an unlikely contrast to your
own. So they don't conform to decency's fantasy blueprint for who
should be in bed with a man of your years and your position—if
anyone should be. Did what resulted from your speaking the word
'spooks' conform to decency's blueprint? Did Iris's stroke conform
to decency's blueprint? Ignore the inanely stupid letter. Why should
you let it deter you?"

"Anonymous inanely stupid letter," he said. "Who has ever sent

me an anonymous letter? Who capable of rational thought sends
anyone an anonymous letter?"

"Maybe it's a French thing," I said. "Isn't there a lot of it in

Balzac? In Stendhal? Aren't there anonymous letters in The Red and
the Black?"

"I don't remember."
"Look, for some reason everything you do must have ruthless-

ness as its explanation, and everything Delphine Roux does must
have virtue as its explanation. Isn't mythology full of giants and
monsters and snakes? By defining you as a monster, she defines her-
self as a heroine. This is her slaying of the monster. This is her re-
venge for your preying on the powerless. She's giving the whole
thing mythological status."

From the smile indulgently offered me, I saw that I wasn't mak-

ing much headway by spinning off, even jokingly, a pre-Homeric
interpretation of the anonymous indictment. "You can't find in
mythmaking," he told me, "an explanation for her mental pro-
cesses. She hasn't the imaginative resources for mythmaking. Her

EVERYONE  KNOWS

métier is the stories that the peasants tell to account for their mis-
ery. The evil eye. The casting of spells. I've cast a spell over Faunia.
Her metier is folktales full of witches and wizards."

We were enjoying ourselves now, and I realized that in my effort

to distract him from his rampaging pique by arguing for the pri-
macy of his pleasure, I had given a boost to his feeling for me—and
exposed mine for him. I was gushing and I knew it. I surprised my-
self with my eagerness to please, felt myself saying too much, ex-
plaining too much, overinvolved and overexcited in the way you are
when you're a kid and you think you've found a soul mate in the
new boy down the street and you feel yourself drawn by the force of
the courtship and so act as you don't normally do and a lot more
openly than you may even want to. But ever since he had banged on
my door the day after Iris's death and proposed that I write Spooks
for him, I had, without figuring or planning on it, fallen into a seri-
ous friendship with Coleman Silk. I wasn't paying attention to his
predicament as merely a mental exercise. His difficulties mattered
to me, and this despite my determination to concern myself, in
whatever time I have left, with nothing but the daily demands of
work, to be engrossed by nothing but solid work, in search of ad-
venture nowhere else—to have not even a life of my own to care
about, let alone somebody else's.

And I realized all this with some disappointment. Abnegation

of society, abstention from distraction, a self-imposed separation
from every last professional yearning and social delusion and cul-
tural poison and alluring intimacy, a rigorous reclusion such as that
practiced by religious devouts who immure themselves in caves or
cells or isolated forest huts, is maintained on stuff more obdurate
than I am made of. I had lasted alone just five years—five years of
reading and writing a few miles up Madamaska Mountain in a
pleasant two-room cabin situated between a small pond at the back
of my place and, through the scrub across the dirt road, a ten-acre
marsh where the migrating Canada geese take shelter each evening
and a patient blue heron does its solitary angling all summer long.

The secret to living in the rush of the world with a minimum of
pain is to get as many people as possible to string along with your
delusions; the trick to living alone up here, away from all agitat-
ing entanglements, allurements, and expectations, apart especially
from one's own intensity, is to organize the silence, to think of its
mountaintop plenitude as capital, silence as wealth exponentially
increasing. The encircling silence as your chosen source of advan-
tage and your only intimate. The trick is to find sustenance in
(Hawthorne again) "the communications of a solitary mind with
itself." The secret is to find sustenance in people like Hawthorne, in
the wisdom of the brilliant deceased.

It took time to face down the difficulties set by this choice, time

and heronlike patience to subdue the longings for everything that
had vanished, but after five years I'd become so skillful at surgically
carving up my days that there was no longer an hour of the event-
less existence I'd embraced that didn't have its importance to me.
Its necessity. Its excitement even. I no longer indulged the perni-
cious wish for something else, and the last thing I thought I could
endure again was the sustained company of someone else. The mu-
sic I play after dinner is not a relief from the silence but something
like its substantiation: listening to music for an hour or two every
evening doesn't deprive me of the silence—the music is the silence
coming true. I swim for thirty minutes in my pond first thing every
summer morning, and, for the rest of the year, after my morning of
writing—and so long as the snow doesn't make hiking impossi-
ble—I'm out on the mountain trails for a couple of hours nearly
every afternoon. There has been no recurrence of the cancer that
cost me my prostate. Sixty-five, fit, well, working hard—and I know
the score. I have to know it.

So why, then, having turned the experiment of radical seclusion

into a rich, full solitary existence—why, with no warning, should I
be lonely? Lonely for what? What's gone is gone. There's no relaxing
the rigor, no undoing the renunciations. Lonely for precisely what?
Simple: for what I had developed an aversion to. For what I had
turned my back on. For life. The entanglement with life.

This was how Coleman became my friend and how I came out

from under the stalwartness of living alone in my secluded house
and dealing with the cancer blows. Coleman Silk danced me right
back into life. First Athena College, then me—here was a man who
made things happen. Indeed, the dance that sealed our friendship
was also what made his disaster my subject. And made his disguise
my subject. And made the proper presentation of his secret my
problem to solve. That was how I ceased being able to live apart
from the turbulence and intensity that I had fled. I did no more
than find a friend, and all the world's malice came rushing in.

Later that afternoon, Coleman took me to meet Faunia at a small
dairy farm six miles from his house, where she lived rent-free in ex-
change for sometimes doing the milking. The dairy operation, a
few years old now, had been initiated by two divorced women, col-
lege-educated environmentalists, who'd each come from a New
England farming family and who had pooled their resources—
pooled their young children as well, six children who, as the owners
liked to tell their customers, weren't dependent on Sesame Street to
learn where milk comes from—to take on the almost impossible
task of making a living by selling raw milk. It was a unique opera-
tion, nothing like what was going on at the big dairy farms, nothing
impersonal or factorylike about it, a place that wouldn't seem like a
dairy farm to most people these days. It was called Organic Live-
stock, and it produced and bottled the raw milk that could be
found in local general stores and in some of the region's supermar-
kets and was available, at the farm, for steady customers who pur-
chased three or more gallons a week.

There were just eleven cows, purebred Jerseys, and each had an

old-fashioned cow name rather than a numbered ear tag to identify
it. Because their milk was not mixed with the milk of the huge
herds that are injected with all sorts of chemicals, and because,
uncompromised by pasteurization and unshattered by homogeni-
zation, the milk took on the tinge, even faintly the flavor, of what-
ever they were eating season by season—feed that had been grown

without the use of herbicides, pesticides, or chemical fertilizers—
and because their milk was richer in nutrients than blended milk, it
was prized by the people around who tried to keep the family diet
to whole rather than processed foods. The farm has a strong follow-
ing particularly among the numerous people tucked away up here,
the retired as well as those raising families, in flight from the pol-
lutants, frustrations, and debasements of a big city. In the local
weekly, a letter to the editor will regularly appear from someone
who has recently found a better life out along these rural roads, and
in reverent tones mention will be made of Organic Livestock milk,
not simply as a tasty drink but as the embodiment of a freshen-
ing, sweetening country purity that their city-battered idealism re-
quires. Words like "goodness" and "soul" crop up regularly in these
published letters, as if downing a glass of Organic Livestock milk
were no less a redemptive religious rite than a nutritional blessing.
"When we drink Organic Livestock milk, our body, soul, and spirit
are getting nourished as a whole. Various organs in our body re-
ceive this wholeness and appreciate it in a way we may not per-
ceive." Sentences like that, sentences with which otherwise sensible
adults, liberated from whatever vexation had driven them from
New York or Hartford or Boston, can spend a pleasant few minutes
at the desk pretending that they are seven years old.

Though Coleman probably used, all told, no more than the half

cup of milk a day he poured over his morning cereal, he'd signed on
with Organic Livestock as a three-gallon-a-week customer. Doing
this allowed him to pick up his milk, fresh from the cow, right at the
farm—to drive his car in from the road and down the long tractor
path to the barn and to walk into the barn and get the milk cold out
of the refrigerator. He'd arranged to do this not so as to be able to
procure the price break extended to three-gallon customers but be-
cause the refrigerator was set just inside the entryway to the barn
and only some fifteen feet from the stall where the cows were led in
to be milked one at a time, twice a day, and where at 5 P.M. (when he
showed up) Faunia, fresh from her duties at the college, would be
doing the milking a few times a week.

EVERYONE   KNOWS

All he ever did there was watch her work. Even though there was

rarely anyone else around at that time, Coleman remained outside
the stall looking in and let her get on with the job without having
to bother to talk to him. Often they said nothing, because saying
nothing intensified their pleasure. She knew he was watching her;
knowing she knew, he watched all the harder—and that they
weren't able to couple down in the dirt didn't make a scrap of dif-
ference. It was enough that they should be alone together some-
where other than in his bed, it was enough to have to maintain the
matter-of-factness of being separated by unsurpassable social ob-
stacles, to play their roles as farm laborer and retired college profes-
sor, to perform consummately at her being a strong, lean working
woman of thirty-four, a wordless illiterate, an elemental rustic of
muscle and bone who'd just been in the yard with the pitchfork
cleaning up from the morning milking, and at his being a thought-
ful senior citizen of seventy-one, an accomplished classicist, an
amplitudinous brain of a man replete with the vocabularies of two
ancient tongues. It was enough to be able to conduct themselves
like two people who had nothing whatsoever in common, all the
while remembering how they could distill to an orgasmic essence
everything about them that was irreconcilable, the human discrep-
ancies that produced all the power. It was enough to feel the thrill
of leading a double life.

There was, at first glance, little to raise unduly one's carnal ex-

pectations about the gaunt, lanky woman spattered with dirt, wear-
ing shorts and a T-shirt and rubber boots, whom I saw in with the
herd that afternoon and whom Coleman identified as his Voluptas.
The carnally authoritative-looking creatures were those with the
bodies that took up all the space, the creamy-colored cows with the
free-swinging, girderlike hips and the barrel-wide paunches and
the disproportionately cartoonish milk-swollen udders, the unagi-
tated, slow-moving, strife-free cows, each a fifteen-hundred-pound
industry of its own gratification, big-eyed beasts for whom chomp-
ing at one extremity from a fodder-filled trough while being sucked
dry at the other by not one or two or three but by four pulsating,

untiring mechanical mouths—for whom sensual stimulus simulta-
neously at both ends was their voluptuous due. Each of them deep
into a bestial existence blissfully lacking in spiritual depth: to squirt
and to chew, to crap and to piss, to graze and to sleep—that was
their whole raison d'être. Occasionally (Coleman explained to me)
a human arm in a long plastic glove is thrust into the rectum to
haul out the manure and then, by feeling with the glove through
the rectal wall, guides the other arm in inserting a syringelike
breeding gun up the reproductive tract to deposit semen. They
propagate, that means, without having to endure the disturbance of
the bull, coddled even in breeding and then assisted in delivery—
and in what Faunia said could prove to be an emotional process for
everyone involved—even on below-zero nights when a blizzard is
blowing. The best of carnal everything, including savoring at their
leisure mushy, dripping mouthfuls of their own stringy cud. Few
courtesans have lived as well, let alone workaday women.

Among those pleasured creatures and the aura they exuded of

an opulent, earthy oneness with female abundance, it was Faunia
who labored like the beast of burden for all that she seemed, with
the cows framing her figure, one of evolution's more pathetic fly-
weights. Calling them to come out from the open shed where they
were reposefully sprawled in a mix of hay and shit—"Let's go,
Daisy, don't give me a hard time. C'mon now, Maggie, that's a good
girl. Move your ass, Flossie, you old bitch"—grabbing them by the
collar and driving and cajoling them through the sludge of the yard
and up one step onto the concrete floor of the milking parlor, shov-
ing these cumbersome Daisys and Maggies in toward the trough
until they were secure in the stanchion, measuring out and pouring
them each their portion of vitamins and feed, disinfecting the teats
and wiping them clean and starting the milk flow with a few jerks
of the hand, then attaching to the sterilized teats the suction cups at
the end of the milk claw, she was in motion constantly, fixed unwa-
veringly on each stage of the milking but, in exaggerated contrast to
their stubborn docility, moving all the time with a beelike adroit-
ness until the milk was streaming through the clear milk tube into

the shining stainless-steel pail, and she at last stood quietly by,
watching to make certain that everything was working and that the
cow too was standing quietly. Then she was again in motion, mas-
saging the udder to be sure the cow was milked out, removing the
teat cups, pouring out the feed portion for the cow she would be
milking after undoing the milked cow from the stanchion, getting
the grain for the next cow in front of the alternate stanchion,
and then, within the confines of that smallish space, grabbing the
milked cow by the collar again and maneuvering her great bulk
around, backing her up with a push, shoving her with a shoulder,
bossily telling her, "Get out, get on out of here, just get—" and lead-
ing her back through the mud to the shed.

Faunia Farley: thin-legged, thin-wristed, thin-armed, with

clearly discernible ribs and shoulder blades that protruded, and
yet when she tensed you saw that her limbs were hard; when she
reached or stretched for something you saw that her breasts were
surprisingly substantial; and when, because of the flies and the
gnats buzzing the herd on this close summer day, she slapped at her
neck or her backside, you saw something of how frisky she could
be, despite the otherwise straight-up style. You saw that her body
was something more than efficiently lean and severe, that she was a
firmly made woman precipitously poised at the moment when she
is no longer ripening but not yet deteriorating, a woman in the
prime of her prime, whose fistful of white hairs is fundamentally
beguiling just because the sharp Yankee contour of her cheeks and
her jaw and the long unmistakably female neck haven't yet been
subject to the transformations of aging.

"This is my neighbor," Coleman said to her when she took a mo-

ment to wipe the sweat from her face with the crook of her elbow
and to look our way. "This is Nathan."

I hadn't expected composure. I was expecting someone openly

angrier. She acknowledged me with no more than a jerk of her chin,
but it was a gesture from which she got a lot of mileage. It was a
chin from which she got a lot of mileage. Keeping it up as she nor-
mally did, it gave her—virility. That was in the response too: some-

thing virile and implacable, as well as a little disreputable, in that
dead-on look. The look of someone for whom both sex and be-
trayal are as basic as bread. The look of the runaway and the look
that results from the galling monotony of bad luck. Her hair, the
golden blond hair in the poignant first stage of its unpreventable
permutation, was twisted at the back through an elastic band, but a
lock kept falling toward her eyebrow as she worked, and now, while
silently looking our way, she pushed it back with her hand, and for
the first time I noticed in her face a small feature that, perhaps
wrongly, because I was searching for a sign, had the effect of some-
thing telling: the convex fullness of the narrow arch of flesh be-
tween the ridge of eyebrow and the upper eyelids. She was a thin-
lipped woman with a straight nose and clear blue eyes and good
teeth and a prominent jaw, and that puff of flesh just beneath her
eyebrows was her only exotic marking, the only emblem of allure,
something swollen with desire. It also accounted for a lot that was
unsettlingly obscure about the hard flatness of her gaze.

In all, Faunia was not the enticing siren who takes your breath

away but a clean-cut-looking woman about whom one thinks, As a
child she must have been very beautiful. Which she was: according
to Coleman, a golden, beautiful child with a rich stepfather who
wouldn't leave her alone and a spoiled mother who wouldn't pro-
tect her.

We stood there watching while she milked each of the eleven

cows—Daisy, Maggie, Flossie, Bessy, Dolly, Maiden, Sweetheart,
Stupid, Emma, Friendly, and Jill—stood there while she went
through the same unvarying routine with every one of them, and
when that was finished and she moved into the whitewashed room
with the big sinks and the hoses and the sterilizing units adjacent to
the milking parlor, we watched her through that doorway mixing
up the lye solution and the cleansing agents and, after separating
the vacuum line from the pipeline and the teat cups from the claw
and the two milker pails from their covers—after disassembling the
whole of the milking unit that she'd taken in there with her—set-
ting to work with a variety of brushes and with sinkful after sinkful

EVERYONE   KNOWS

of clear water to scrub every surface of every tube, valve, gasket,
plug, plate, liner, cap, disc, and piston until each was spotlessly
clean and sanitized. Before Coleman took his milk and we got back
into his car to leave, he and I had stood together by the refrigerator
for close to an hour and a half and, aside from the words he uttered
to introduce me to her, nobody human said anything more. All you
could hear was the whirring and the chirping of the barn swallows
who nested there as they whished through the rafters where the
barn opened out behind us, and the pellets dropping into the ce-
ment trough when she shook out the feed pail, and the shuffling
clump of the barely lifted hooves on the milking parlor floor as
Faunia, shoving and dragging and steering the cows, positioned
them into the stanchion, and then the suction noise, the soft deep
breathing of the milk pump.

After they were each buried four months later, I would remem-

ber that milking session as though it were a theatrical performance
in which I had played the part of a walk-on, an extra, which indeed
I now am. Night after night, I could not sleep because I couldn't
stop being up there on the stage with the two leading actors and the
chorus of cows, observing this scene, flawlessly performed by the
entire ensemble, of an enamored old man watching at work the
cleaning woman-farmhand who is secretly his paramour: a scene
of pathos and hypnosis and sexual subjugation in which every-
thing the woman does with those cows, the way she handles them,
touches them, services them, talks to them, his greedy fascination
appropriates; a scene in which a man taken over by a force so long
suppressed in him that it had all but been extinguished revealed,
before my eyes, the resurgence of its stupefying power. It was some-
thing, I suppose, like watching Aschenbach feverishly watching
Tadzio—his sexual longing brought to a boil by the anguishing fact
of mortality—except that we weren't in a luxury hotel on the Ven-
ice Lido nor were we characters in a novel written in German or
even, back then, in one written in English: it was high summer and
we were in a barn in the Northeast of our country, in America in
the year of America's presidential impeachment, and, as yet, we

were no more novelistic than the animals were mythological or
stuffed. The light and heat of the day (that blessing), the unchang-
ing quiet of each cow's life as it paralleled that of all the others, the
enamored old man studying the suppleness of the efficient, ener-
getic woman, the adulation rising in him, his looking as though
nothing more stirring had ever before happened to him, and, too,
my own willing waiting, my own fascination with their extensive
disparity as human types, with the nonuniformity, the variability,
the teeming irregularity of sexual arrangements—and with the in-
junction upon us, human and bovine, the highly differentiated and
the all but undifferentiated, to live, not merely to endure but to live,
to go on taking, giving, feeding, milking, acknowledging whole-
heartedly, as the enigma that it is, the pointless meaningfulness of
living—all was recorded as real by tens of thousands of minute im-
pressions. The sensory fullness, the copiousness, the abundant—
superabundant—detail of life, which is the rhapsody. And Cole-
man and Faunia, who are now dead, deep in the flow of the unex-
pected, day by day, minute by minute, themselves details in that su-
perabundance.

Nothing lasts, and yet nothing passes, either. And nothing passes

just because nothing lasts.

The trouble with Les Farley began later that night, when Coleman
heard something stirring in the bushes outside his house, decided it
wasn't a deer or a raccoon, got up from the kitchen table where he
and Faunia had just finished their spaghetti dinner, and, from the
kitchen door, in the summer evening half-light, caught sight of a
man running across the field back of the house and toward the
woods. "Hey! You! Stop!" Coleman shouted, but the man neither
stopped nor looked back and disappeared quickly into the trees.
This wasn't the first time in recent months that Coleman believed
he was being watched by someone hiding within inches of the
house, but previously it had been later in the evening and too dark
for him to know for sure whether he had been alerted by the move-
ments of a peeping Tom or of an animal. And previously he had al-

ways been alone. This was the first time Faunia was there, and it was
she who, without having to see the man's silhouette cutting across
the field, identified the trespasser as her ex-husband.

After the divorce, she told Coleman, Farley had spied on her all

the time, but in the months following the death of the two children,
when he was accusing her of having killed them by her negligence,
he was frighteningly unrelenting. Twice he popped up out of no-
where—once in the parking lot of a supermarket, once when she
was at a gas station—and screamed out of the pickup window,
"Murdering whore! Murdering bitch! You murdered my kids, you
murdering bitch!" There were many mornings when, on her way to
the college, she'd look in the rearview mirror and there would be
his pickup truck and, back of the windshield, his face with the lips
mouthing, "You murdered my kids." Sometimes he'd be on the road
behind her when she was driving home from the college. She was
then still living in the unburned half of the bungalow-garage where
the children had been asphyxiated in the heater fire, and it was out
of fear of him that she'd moved from there to a room in Seeley Falls
and then, after a foiled suicide attempt, into the room at the dairy
farm, where the two owners and their small children were almost
always around and the danger was not so great of her being ac-
costed by him. Farley's pickup appeared in her rearview mirror less
frequently after the second move, and then, when there was no sign
of him for months, she hoped he might be gone for good. But now,
Faunia was sure of it, he'd somehow found out about Coleman and,
enraged again with everything that had always enraged him about
her, he was back at his crazy spying, hiding outside Coleman's
house to see what she was doing there. What they were doing there.

That night, when Faunia got into her car—the old Chevy that

Coleman preferred her to park, out of sight, inside his barn—
Coleman decided to follow close behind her in his own car for the
six miles until she was safely onto the dirt driveway that led past the
cow barn to the farmhouse. And then all the way back to his own
house he looked to see if anyone was behind him. At home, he
walked from the car shed to the house swinging a tire iron in one

hand, swinging it in all directions, hoping in that way to keep at bay
anyone lurking in the dark.

By the next morning, after eight hours on his bed contending

with his worries, Coleman had decided against lodging a complaint
with the state police. Because Farley's identity couldn't be positively
established, the police would be unable to do anything about him
anyway, and should it leak out that Coleman had contacted them,
his call would have served only to corroborate the gossip already
circulating about the former dean and the Athena janitor. Not that,
after his sleepless night, Coleman could resign himself to doing
nothing about everything: following breakfast, he phoned his law-
yer, Nelson Primus, and that afternoon went down to Athena to
consult with him about the anonymous letter and there, overriding
Primus's suggestion that he forget about it, prevailed on him to
write, as follows, to Delphine Roux at the college: "Dear Ms. Roux: I
represent Coleman Silk. Several days ago, you sent an anonymous
letter to Mr. Silk that is offensive, harassing, and denigrating to
Mr. Silk. The content of your letter reads: 'Everyone knows you're
sexually exploiting an abused, illiterate woman half your age.' You
have, unfortunately, interjected yourself and become a participant
in something that is not your business. In doing that, you have vio-
lated Mr. Silk's legal rights and are subject to suit."

A few days later Primus received three curt sentences back from

Delphine Roux's lawyer. The middle sentence, flatly denying the
charge that Delphine Roux was the author of the anonymous letter,
Coleman underlined in red. "None of the assertions in your letter
are correct," her lawyer had written to Primus, "and, indeed, they
are defamatory."

Immediately Coleman got from Primus the name of a certified

documents examiner in Boston, a handwriting analyst who did fo-
rensic work for private corporations, U.S. government agencies,
and the state, and the next day, he himself drove the three hours to
Boston to deliver into the hands of the documents examiner his
samples of Delphine Roux's handwriting along with the anony-
mous letter and its envelope. He received the findings in the mail

the next week. "At your request," read the report, "I examined and
compared copies of known handwriting of Delphine Roux with a
questioned anonymous note and an envelope addressed to Cole-
man Silk. You asked for a determination of the authorship of the
handwriting on the questioned documents. My examination covers
handwriting characteristics such as slant, spacing, letter formation,
line quality, pressure pattern, proportion, letter height relationship,
connections and initials and terminal stroke formation. Based on
the documents submitted, it is my professional opinion that the
hand that penned all the known standards as Delphine Roux is one
and the same hand that penned the questioned anonymous note
and envelope. Sincerely, Douglas Gordon, CDE." When Coleman
turned the examiner's report over to Nelson Primus, with instruc-
tions to forward a copy to Delphine Roux's lawyer, Primus no longer
put up an argument, however distressing it was to him to see
Coleman nearly as enraged as he'd been back during the crisis with
the college.

In all, eight days had passed since the evening he'd seen Farley

fleeing into the woods, eight days during which he had determined
it would be best if Faunia stayed away and they communicated by
phone. So as not to invite spying on either of them from any quar-
ter, he didn't go out to the farm to fetch his raw milk but stayed at
home as much as he could and kept a careful watch there, especially
after dark, to determine if anyone was snooping around. Faunia, in
turn, was told to keep a lookout of her own at the dairy farm and
to check her rearview mirror when she drove anywhere. "It's as
though we're a menace to public safety," she told him, laughing
her laugh. "No, public health," he replied—"we're in noncompli-
ance with the board of health."

By the end of the eight days, when he had been able at least to

confirm Delphine Roux's identification as the letter writer if not yet
Farley's as the trespasser, Coleman decided to decide that he'd done
everything within his power to defend against all of this disagree-
able and provocative meddling. When Faunia phoned him that
afternoon during her lunch break and asked, "Is the quarantine

THE   HUMAN   STAIN

over?" he at last felt free of enough of his anxiety—or decided to
decide to be—to give the all-clear sign.

As he expected her to show up around seven that evening, he

swallowed a Viagra tablet at six and, after pouring himself a glass of
wine, walked outside with the phone to settle into a lawn chair and
telephone his daughter. He and Iris had reared four children: two
sons now into their forties, both college professors of science, married
and with children and living on the West Coast, and the twins, Lisa
and Mark, unmarried, in their late thirties, and both living in New
York. All but one of the Silk offspring tried to get up to the
Berkshires to see their father three or four times a year and stayed in
touch every month by phone. The exception was Mark, who'd been
at odds with Coleman all his life and sporadically cut himself off
completely.

than a month and maybe even two since he'd spoken to her. Per-
haps he was merely surrendering to a transient feeling of loneliness
that would have passed when Faunia arrived, but whatever his mo-
tive, he could have had no inkling, before the phone call, of what
was in store. Surely the last thing he was looking for was yet more
opposition, least of all from that child whose voice alone—soft,
melodic, girlish still, despite twelve difficult years as a teacher on
the Lower East Side—he could always depend on to soothe him, to
calm him, sometimes to do even more: to infatuate him with this
daughter all over again. He was doing probably what most any aging
parent will do when, for any of a hundred reasons, he or she looks
to a long-distance phone call for a momentary reminder of the old
terms of reference. The unbroken, unequivocal history of tenderness
between Coleman and Lisa made of her the least af-frontable person
still close to him.

Some three years earlier—back before the spooks incident—

when Lisa was wondering if she hadn't made an enormous mistake
by giving up classroom teaching to become a Reading Recovery
teacher, Coleman had gone down to New York and stayed several
days to see how bad off she was. Iris was alive then, very much alive,

but it wasn't Iris's enormous energy Lisa had wanted—it wasn't to
be put into motion the way Iris could put you in motion that she
wanted—rather, it was the former dean of faculty with his orderly,
determined way of untangling a mess. Iris was sure to tell her to
forge ahead, leaving Lisa overwhelmed and feeling trapped; with
him there was the possibility that, if Lisa made a compelling case
against her own persevering, he would tell her that, if she wished,
she could cut her losses and quit—which would, in turn, give her
the gumption to go on.

He'd not only spent the first night sitting up late in her living

room and listening to her woes, but the next day he'd gone to the
school to see what it was that was burning her out. And he saw, all
right: in the morning, first thing, four back-to-back half-hour ses-
sions, each with a six- or seven-year-old who was among the low-
est-achieving students in the first and second grades, and after that,
for the rest of the day, forty-five-minute sessions with groups of
eight kids whose reading skills were no better than those of the
one-on-one kids but for whom there wasn't yet enough trained
staff in the intensive program.

"The regular class sizes are too big," Lisa told him, "and so the

teachers can't reach these kids. I was a classroom teacher. The kids
who are struggling—it's three out of thirty. Three or four. It's not
too bad. You have the progress of all the other kids helping you
along. Instead of stopping and giving the hopeless kids what they
need, teachers just sort of shuffle them through, thinking—or pre-
tending—they are moving with the continuum. They're shuffled to
the second grade, the third grade, the fourth grade, and then they
seriously fail. But here it's only these kids, the ones who can't be
reached and don't get reached, and because I'm very emotional
about my kids and teaching, it affects my whole being—my whole
world. And the school, the leadership—Dad, it's not good. You have
a principal who doesn't have a vision of what she wants, and you
have a mishmash of people doing what they think is best. Which is
not necessarily what is best. When I came here twelve years ago it
was great. The principal was really good. She turned the whole

THE   HUMAN   STAIN

school around. But now we've gone through twenty-one teachers in
four years. Which is a lot. We've lost a lot of good people. Two years
ago I went into Reading Recovery because I just got burnt out in
the classroom. Ten years of that day in and day out. I couldn't take
any more."

He let her talk, said little, and, because she was but a few years

from forty, suppressed easily enough the impulse to take in his
arms this battered-by-reality daughter as he imagined she sup-
pressed the same impulse with the six-year-old kid who couldn't
read. Lisa had all of Iris's intensity without Iris's authority, and for
someone whose life existed only for others—incurable altruism
was Lisa's curse—she was, as a teacher, perpetually hovering at the
edge of depletion. There was generally a demanding boyfriend as
well from whom she could not withhold kindness, and for whom
she turned herself inside out, and for whom, unfailingly, her un-
contaminated ethical virginity became a great big bore. Lisa was al-
ways morally in over her head, but without either the callousness to
disappoint the need of another or the strength to disillusion herself
about her strength. This was why he knew she would never quit the
Reading Recovery program, and also why such paternal pride as he
had in her was not only weighted with fear but at times tinged with
an impatience bordering on contempt.

"Thirty kids you have to take care of, the different levels that the

kids come in at, the different experiences they've had, and you've
got to make it all work," she was telling him. "Thirty diverse kids
from thirty diverse backgrounds learning thirty diverse ways. That's
a lot of management. That's a lot of paperwork. That's a lot of ev-
erything. But that is still nothing compared to this. Sure, even with
this, even in Reading Recovery, I have days when I think, Today I
was good, but most days I want to jump out the window. I struggle
a lot as to whether this is the right program for me. Because I'm
very intense, in case you didn't know. I want to do it the right way,
and there is no right way—every kid is different and every kid is
hopeless, and I'm supposed to go in there and make it all work. Of
course everybody always struggles with the kids who can't learn.

EVERYONE  KNOWS

What do you do with a kid who can't read? Think of it—a kid who
can't read. It's difficult, Daddy. Your ego gets a little caught up in it,
you know."

Lisa, who contains within her so much concern, whose conscien-
tiousness knows no ambivalence, who wishes to exist only to assist.
Lisa the Undisillusionable, Lisa the Unspeakably Idealistic. Phone
Lisa, he told himself, little imagining that he could ever elicit from
this foolishly saintly child of his the tone of steely displeasure with
which she received his call.

"You don't sound like yourself."
"I'm fine," she told him.
"What's wrong, Lisa?"
"Nothing."
"How's summer school? How's teaching?"
"Fine."
"And Josh?" The latest boyfriend.
"Fine."
"How are your kids? What happened to the little one who

couldn't recognize the letter n? Did he ever get to level ten? The kid
with all the n's in his name—Hernando."

"Everything's fine."
He then asked lightly, "Would you care to know how I am?"
"I know how you are."
"Do you?"
No answer.
"What's eating you, sweetheart?"
"Nothing." A "nothing," the second one, that meant all too

clearly, Don't you sweetheart me.

Something incomprehensible was happening. Who had told her?

What had they told her? As a high school kid and then in college af-
ter the war he had pursued the most demanding curriculum; as
dean at Athena he had thrived on the difficulties of a taxing job; as
the accused in the spooks incident he had never once weakened in
fighting the false accusation against him; even his resignation from

THE  HUMAN   STAIN

the college had been an act not of capitulation but of outraged pro-
test, a deliberate manifestation of his unwavering contempt. But in
all his years of holding his own against whatever the task or the set-
back or the shock, he had never—not even after Iris's death—felt as
stripped of all defenses as when Lisa, the embodiment of an almost
mockable kindness, gathered up into that one word "nothing" all
the harshness of feeling for which she had never before, in the
whole of her life, found a deserving object.

And then, even as Lisa's "nothing" was exuding its awful mean-

ing, Coleman saw a pickup truck moving along the blacktop road
down from the house—rolling at a crawl a couple of yards forward,
braking, very slowly rolling again, then braking again ... Coleman
came to his feet, started uncertainly across the mown grass, craning
his head to get a look, and then, on the run, began to shout, "You!
What are you up to! Hey!" But the pickup quickly increased its
speed and was out of sight before Coleman could get near enough
to discern anything of use to him about either driver or truck. As he
didn't know one make from another and, from where he'd wound
up, couldn't even tell if the truck was new or old, all that he came
away with was its color, an indeterminate gray.

And now the phone was dead. In running across the lawn, he'd

inadvertently touched the off button. That, or Lisa had deliberately
broken the connection. When he redialed, a man answered. "Is this
Josh?" Coleman asked. "Yes," the man said. "This is Coleman Silk.
Lisa's father." After a moment's silence, the man said, "Lisa doesn't
want to talk," and hung up.

Mark's doing. It had to be. Could not be anyone else's. Couldn't

be this fucking Josh's—who was he? Coleman had no more idea
how Mark could have found out about Faunia than how Delphine
Roux or anyone else had, but that didn't matter right now—it was
Mark who had assailed his twin sister with their father's crime. For
crime it would be to that boy. Almost from the time he could speak,
Mark couldn't give up the idea that his father was against him: for
the two older sons because they were older and starred at school
and imbibed without complaint their father's intellectual preten-

EVERYONE   KNOWS

sions; for Lisa because she was Lisa, the family's little girl, indisput-
ably the child most indulged by her daddy; against Mark because
everything his twin sister was—adorable, adoring, virtuous, touch-
ing, noble to the core—Mark was not and refused to be.

Mark's was probably the most difficult personality it was ever

Coleman's lot to try, not to understand—the resentments were all
too easy to understand—but to grapple with. The whining and
sulking had begun before he was old enough to go off to kindergar-
ten, and the protest against his family and their sense of things
started soon after and, despite all attempts at propitiation, solidi-
fied over the years into his core. At the age of fourteen he vocifer-
ously supported Nixon during the impeachment hearings while the
rest of them were rooting for the president to be imprisoned for
life; at sixteen he became an Orthodox Jew while the rest of them,
taking their cue from their anticlerical, atheistic parents, were Jews
in little more than name; at twenty he enraged his father by drop-
ping out of Brandeis with two semesters to go, and now, almost
into his forties, having taken up and jettisoned a dozen different
jobs to which he considered himself superior, he had discovered
that he was a narrative poet.

Because of his unshakable enmity for his father, Mark had made

himself into whatever his family wasn't—more sadly to the point,
into whatever he wasn't. A clever boy, well read, with a quick mind
and a sharp tongue, he nonetheless could never see his way around
Coleman until, at thirty-eight, as a narrative poet on biblical
themes, he had come to nurse his great life-organizing aversion
with all the arrogance of someone who has succeeded at nothing.
A devoted girlfriend, a humorless, high-strung, religiously obser-
vant young woman, earned their keep as a dental technician in
Manhattan while Mark stayed home in their Brooklyn walk-up and
wrote the biblically inspired poems that not even the Jewish maga-
zines would publish, interminable poems about how David had
wronged his son Absalom and how Isaac had wronged his son Esau
and how Judah had wronged his brother Joseph and about the
curse of the prophet Nathan after David sinned with Bathsheba—

poems that, in one grandiosely ill-disguised way or another, harked
back to the idée fixe on which Markie had staked everything and
lost everything.

charge brought by Markie when she knew what had been driving
him all his life? But then Lisa's being generous toward her brother,
however misbegotten she found the antagonisms that deformed
him, went back almost to their birth as twins. Because it was her
nature to be benevolent, and because even as a little schoolgirl she
had suffered the troubled conscience of the preferred child, she had
always gently indulged her twin brother's grievances and acted as
his comforter in family disputes. But must her solicitousness to-
ward the less favored of their twosome extend even to this crazy
charge? And what was the charge? What harmful act had the father
committed, what injury had he inflicted on his children that should
put these twins in league with Delphine Roux and Lester Farley?
And the other two, his scientist sons—were they and their scruples
in on this too? When had he last heard from them?

He remembered now that awful hour at the house after Iris's fu-

neral, remembered and was stung all over again by the charges that
Mark had brought against his father before the older boys moved in
and physically removed him to his old room for the rest of the af-
ternoon. In the days that followed, while the kids were all still
around, Coleman was willing to blame Markie's grief and not Mark
for what the boy had dared to say, but that didn't mean that he'd
forgotten or that he ever would. Markie had begun berating him
only minutes after they'd driven back from the cemetery. "The col-
lege didn't do it. The blacks didn't do it. Your enemies didn't do it.
You did it. You killed mother. The way you kill everything! Because
you have to be right! Because you won't apologize, because every
time you are a hundred percent right, now it's Mother who's dead!
And it all could have been settled so easily—all of it settled in
twenty-four hours if you knew how once in your life to apologize.
'I'm sorry that I said "spooks."' That's all you had to do, great man,

just go to those students and say you were sorry, and Mother would
not be dead!"

Out on his lawn, Coleman was seized suddenly with the sort of

indignation he had not felt since the day following Markie's out-
burst, when he'd written and submitted his resignation from the
college all in an hour's time. He knew that it was not correct to have
such feelings toward his children. He knew, from the spooks inci-
dent, that indignation on such a scale was a form of madness, and
one to which he could succumb. He knew that indignation like this
could lead to no orderly and reasoned approach to the problem. He
knew as an educator how to educate and as a father how to father
and as a man of over seventy that one must regard nothing, partic-
ularly within a family, even one containing a grudge-laden son like
Mark, as implacably unchangeable. And it wasn't from the spooks
incident alone that he knew about what can corrode and warp a
man who believes himself to have been grievously wronged. He
knew from the wrath of Achilles, the rage of Philoctetes, the fulmi-
nations of Medea, the madness of Ajax, the despair of Electra, and
the suffering of Prometheus the many horrors that can ensue when
the highest degree of indignation is achieved and, in the name of
justice, retribution is exacted and a cycle of retaliation begins.

And it was lucky that he knew all this, because it took no less

than this, no less than the prophylaxis of the whole of Attic tragedy
and Greek epic poetry, to restrain him from phoning on the spot to
remind Markie what a little prick he was and always had been.

The head-on confrontation with Farley came some four hours later.
As I reconstruct it, Coleman, so as to be certain that no one was
spying on the house, was himself in and out the front door and the
back door and the kitchen door some six or seven times in the
hours after Faunia's arrival. It wasn't until somewhere around ten,
when the two of them were standing together inside the kitchen
screen door, holding each other before parting for the night, that he
was able to rise above all the corroding indignation and to allow the

really serious thing in his life—the intoxication with the last fling,
what Mann, writing of Aschenbach, called the "late adventure of
the feelings"—to reassert itself and take charge of him. As she was
about to leave, he at last found himself craving for her as though
nothing else mattered—and none of it did, not his daughter, not
his sons, not Faunia's ex-husband or Delphine Roux. This is not
merely life, he thought, this is the end of life. What was unendur-
able wasn't all this ridiculous antipathy he and Faunia had aroused;
what was unendurable was that he was down to the last bucket of
days, to the bottom of the bucket, the time if there ever was a time
to quit the quarrel, to give up the rebuttal, to undo himself from the
conscientiousness with which he had raised the four lively chil-
dren, persisted in the combative marriage, influenced the recalci-
trant colleagues, and guided Athena's mediocre students, as best he
could, through a literature some twenty-five hundred years old. It
was the time to yield, to let this simple craving be his guide. Beyond
their accusation. Beyond their indictment. Beyond their judgment.
Learn, he told himself, before you die, to live beyond the jurisdic-
tion of their enraging, loathsome, stupid blame.

The encounter with Farley. The encounter that night with Farley,
the confrontation with a dairy farmer who had not meant to fail
but did, a road crew employee who gave his all to the town no mat-
ter how lowly and degrading the task assigned him, a loyal Ameri-
can who'd served his country with not one tour but two, who'd
gone back a second time to finish the goddamn job. Re-upped and
went back because when he comes home the first time everybody
says that he isn't the same person and that they don't recognize
him, and he sees that it's true: they're all afraid of him. He comes
home to them from jungle warfare and not only is he not appreci-
ated but he is feared, so he might as well go back. He wasn't expect-
ing the hero treatment, but everybody looking at him like that? So
he goes back for the second tour, and this time he is geared up.
Pissed off. Pumped up. A very aggressive warrior. The first time he
wasn't all that gung ho. The first time he was easygoing Les, who

didn't know what it meant to feel hopeless. The first time he was
the boy from the Berkshires who put a lot of trust in people and
had no idea how cheap life could be, didn't know what medication
was, didn't feel inferior to anyone, happy-go-lucky Les, no threat to
society, tons of friends, fast cars, all that stuff. The first time he'd cut
off ears because he was there and it was being done, but that was it.
He wasn't one of those who once they were in all that lawlessness
couldn't wait to get going, the ones who weren't too well put to-
gether or were pretty aggressive to start off with and only needed
the slightest opportunity to go ape-shit. One guy in his unit, guy
they called Big Man, he wasn't there one or two days when he'd
slashed some pregnant woman's belly open. Farley was himself only
beginning to get good at it at the end of his first tour. But the sec-
ond time, in this unit where there are a lot of other guys who'd also
come back and who hadn't come back just to kill time or to make a
couple extra bucks, this second time, in with these guys who are al-
ways looking to be put out in front, ape-shit guys who recognize
the horror but know it is the very best moment of their lives, he is
ape-shit too. In a firefight, running from danger, blasting with guns,
you can't not be frightened, but you can go berserk and get the
rush, and so the second time he goes berserk. The second time he
fucking wreaks havoc. Living right out there on the edge, full throt-
tle, the excitement and the fear, and there's nothing in civilian life
that can match it. Door gunning. They're losing helicopters and
they need door gunners. They ask at some point for door gunners
and he jumps at it, he volunteers. Up there above the action, and
everything looks small from above, and he just guns down huge.
Whatever moves. Death and destruction, that is what door gunning
is all about. With the added attraction that you don't have to be
down in the jungle the whole time. But then he comes home and
it's not better than the first time, it's worse. Not like the guys in
World War II: they had the ship, they got to relax, someone took
care of them, asked them how they were. There's no transition. One
day he's door gunning in Vietnam, seeing choppers explode, in
midair seeing his buddies explode, down so low he smells skin

cooking, hears the cries, sees whole villages going up in flames, and
the next day he's back in the Berkshires. And now he really doesn't
belong, and, besides, he's got fears now about things going over his
head. He doesn't want to be around other people, he can't laugh or
joke, he feels that he is no longer a part of their world, that he has
seen and done things so outside what these people know about that
he cannot connect to them and they cannot connect to him. They
told him he could go home? How could he go home? He doesn't
have a helicopter at home. He stays by himself and he drinks, and
when he tries the VA they tell him he is just there to get the money
while he knows he is there to get the help. Early on, he tried to get
government help and all they gave him was some sleeping pills, so
fuck the government. Treated him like garbage. You're young, they
told him, you'll get over it. So he tries to get over it. Can't deal with
the government, so he'll have to do it on his own. Only it isn't easy
after two tours to come back and get settled all on his own. He's
not calm. He's agitated. He's restless. He's drinking. It doesn't take
much to put him into a rage. There are these things going over his
head. Still he tries: eventually gets the wife, the home, the kids, the
farm. He wants to be alone, but she wants to settle down and farm
with him, so he tries to want to settle down too. Stuff he remembers
easygoing Les wanting ten, fifteen years back, before Vietnam, he
tries to want again. The trouble is, he can't really feel for these folks.
He's sitting in the kitchen and he's eating with them and there's
nothing. No way he can go from that to this. Yet still he tries. A cou-
ple times in the middle of the night he wakes up choking her, but it
isn't his fault—it's the government's fault. The government did that
to him. He thought she was the fucking enemy. What did she think
he was going to do? She knew he was going to come out of it. He
never hurt her and he never hurt the kids. That was all lies. She
never cared about anything except herself. He should have known
never to let her go off with those kids. She waited until he was in
rehab—that was why she wanted to get him into rehab. She said she
wanted him to be better so that they could be together again, and
instead she used the whole thing against him to get the kids away

from him. The bitch. The cunt. She tricked him. He should have
known never to let her go off with those kids. It was partly his own
fault because he was so drunk and they could get him to rehab by
force, but it would have been better if he'd taken them all out when
he said he would. Should have killed her, should have killed the
kids, and would have if it hadn't been for rehab. And she knew it,
knew he'd have killed them like that if she'd ever tried to take them
away. He was the father—if anybody was going to raise his kids it
was him. If he couldn't take care of them, the kids would be better
off dead. She'd had no right to steal his kids. Steals them, then she
kills them. The payback for what he did in Vietnam. They all said
that at rehab—payback this and payback that, but because every-
one said it, didn't make it not so. It was payback, all payback, the
death of the kids was payback and the carpenter she was fucking
was payback. He didn't know why he hadn't killed him. At first he
just smelled the smoke. He was in the bushes down the road watch-
ing the two of them in the carpenter's pickup. They were parked
in her driveway. She comes downstairs—the apartment she's rent-
ing is over a garage back of some bungalow—and she gets in the
pickup and there's no light and there's no moon but he knows
what's going on. Then he smelled the smoke. The only way he'd
survived in Vietnam was that any change, a noise, the smell of an
animal, any movement at all in the jungle, and he could detect it
before anyone else—alert in the jungle like he was born there.
Couldn't see the smoke, couldn't see the flames, couldn't see any-
thing it was so dark, but all of a sudden he could smell the smoke
and these things are flying over his head and he began running.
They see him coming and they think he is going to steal the kids.
They don't know the building is on fire. They think he's gone nuts.
But he can smell the smoke and he knows it's coming from the sec-
ond story and he knows the kids are in there. He knows his wife,
stupid bitch cunt, isn't going to do anything because she's in the
truck blowing the carpenter. He runs right by them. He doesn't
know where he is now, forgets where he is, all he knows is that he's
got to get in there and up the stairs, and so he bashes in the side

door and he's running up to where the fire is, and that's when he
sees the kids on the stairs, huddled there at the top of the stairs, and
they're gasping, and that's when he picks them up. They're crum-
pled together on the stairs and he picks them up and tears out the
door. They're alive, he's sure. He doesn't think there's a chance that
they're not alive. He just thinks they're scared. Then he looks up
and who does he see outside the door, standing there looking, but
the carpenter. That's when he lost it. Didn't know what he was do-
ing. That's when he went straight for his throat. Started choking
him, and that bitch, instead of going to the kids, worries about him
choking the fucking boyfriend. Fucking bitch worries about him
killing her boyfriend instead of about her own goddamn kids. And
they would have made it. That's why they died. Because she didn't
give two shits about the kids. She never did. They weren't dead
when he picked them up. They were warm. He knows what dead is.
Two tours in Vietnam you're not going to tell him what dead is. He
can smell death when he needs to. He can taste death. He knows
what death is. They—were—not—dead. It was the boyfriend who
was going to be fucking dead, until the police, in cahoots with the
government, came with their guns, and that's when they put him
away. The bitch kills the kids, it's her neglect, and they put him
away. Jesus Christ, let me be right for a minute! The bitch wasn't
paying attention! She never does. Like when he had the hunch they
were headed for an ambush. Couldn't say why but he knew they
were being set up, and nobody believed him, and he was right.
Some new dumb officer comes into the company, won't listen to
him, and that's how people get killed. That's how people get burned
to hell! That's how assholes cause the death of your two best bud-
dies! They don't listen to him! They don't give him credit! He came
back alive, didn't he? He came back with all his limbs, he came back
with his dick—you know what that took? But she won't listen!
Never! She turned her back on him and she turned her back on his
kids. He's just a crazy Vietnam vet. But he knows things, goddamnit.
And she knows nothing. But do they put away the stupid bitch?
They put him away. They shoot him up with stuff. Again they put

EVERYONE   KNOWS

him in restraints, and they won't let him out of the Northampton
VA. And all he did was what they had trained him to do: you see the
enemy, you kill the enemy. They train you for a year, then they try
to kill you for a year, and when you're just doing what they trained
you to do, that is when they fucking put the leather restraints on
you and shoot you full of shit. He did what they were training him
to do, and while he was doing that, his fucking wife is turning her
back on his kids. He should have killed them all when he could.
Him especially. The boyfriend. He should have cut their fucking
heads off. He doesn't know why he didn't. Better not come fucking
near him. If he knows where the fucking boyfriend is, he'll kill him
so fast he won't know what hit him, and they won't know he did it
because he knows how to do it so no one can hear it. Because that's
what the government trained him to do. He is a trained killer
thanks to the government of the United States. He did his job. He
did what he was told to do. And this is how he fucking gets treated?
They get him down in the lockup ward, they put him in the bubble,
they send him to the fucking bubble! And they won't even cut him a
check. For all this he gets fucking twenty percent. Twenty percent.
He put his whole family through hell for twenty percent. And even
for that he has to grovel. "So, tell me what happened," they say, the
little social workers, the little psychologists with their college de-
grees. "Did you kill anyone when you were in Vietnam?" Was there
anyone he didn't kill when he was in Vietnam? Wasn't that what he
was supposed to do when they sent him to Vietnam? Fucking kill
gooks. They said everything goes? So everything went. It all relates
to the word "kill." Kill gooks! If "Did you kill anyone?" isn't bad
enough, they give him a fucking gook psychiatrist, this like Chink
shit. He serves his country and he can't even get a doctor who
fucking speaks English. All round Northampton they've got Chi-
nese restaurants, they've got Vietnamese restaurants, Korean mar-
kets—but him? If you're some Vietnamese, you're some Chink, you
make out, you get a restaurant, you get a market, you get a grocery
store, you get a family, you get a good education. But they got fuck-
all for him. Because they want him dead. They wish he never came

back. He is their worst nightmare. He was not supposed to come
back. And now this college professor. Know where he was when the
government sent us in there with one arm tied behind our backs?
He was out there leading the fucking protesters. They pay them,
when they go to college, to teach, to teach the kids, not to fucking
protest the Vietnam War. They didn't give us a fucking chance.
They say we lost the war. We didn't lose the war, the government
lost the war. But when fancy-pants professors felt like it, instead of
teaching class some day they go picketing out there against the war,
and that is the thanks he gets for serving his country. That is the
thanks for the shit he had to put up with day in and day out. He
can't get a goddamn night's sleep. He hasn't had a good night's
sleep in fucking twenty-six years. And for that, for that his wife goes
down on some two-bit kike professor? There weren't too many
kikes in Vietnam, not that he can remember. They were too busy
getting their degrees. Jew bastard. There's something wrong with
those Jew bastards. They don't look right. She goes down on him?
Jesus Christ. Vomit, man. What was it all for? She doesn't know
what it's like. Never had a hard day in her life. He never hurt her
and he never hurt the kids. "Oh, my stepfather was mean to me."
Stepfather used to finger her. Should have fucked her, that would
have straightened her out a little. The kids would be alive today. His
fucking kids would be alive today! He'd be like all the rest of those
guys out there, with their families and their nice cars. Instead of
locked up in a fucking VA facility. That was the thanks he got:
Thorazine. His thanks was the Thorazine shuffle. Just because he
thought he was back in the Nam.

This was the Lester Farley who came roaring out of the bushes. This
was the man who came upon Coleman and Faunia as they stood
just inside the kitchen doorway, who came roaring at them out of
the darkness of the bushes at the side of the house. And all of that
was just a little of what was inside his head, night after night, all
through the spring and now into early summer, hiding for hours on
end, cramped, still, living through so much emotion, and waiting

EVERYONE  KNOWS

there in hiding to see her doing it. Doing what she was doing when
her own two kids were suffocating to death in the smoke. This time
it wasn't even with a guy her age. Not even Farley's age. This time it
wasn't with her boss, the great All-American Hollenbeck. Hollen-
beck could give her something in return at least. You could almost
respect her for Hollenbeck. But now the woman was so far gone she
would do it for nothing with anybody. Now it was with a gray-
haired skin-and-bones old man, with a high-and-mighty Jew pro-
fessor, his yellow Jew face contorted with pleasure and his trem-
bling old hands gripping her head. Who else has a wife sucks off an
old Jew? Who else! This time the wanton, murdering, moaning
bitch was pumping into her whoring mouth the watery come of a
disgusting old Jew, and Rawley and Les Junior were still dead.
Payback. There was no end to it.

It felt like flying, it felt like Nam, it felt like the moment in which
you go wild. Crazier, suddenly, because she is sucking off that Jew
than because she killed the kids, Farley is flying upward, screaming,
and the Jew professor is screaming back, the Jew professor is raising
a tire iron, and it is only because Farley is unarmed—because that
night he'd come there right from fire department drill and without
a single one of the guns from his basement full of guns—that he
doesn't blow them away. How it happened that he didn't reach for
the tire iron and take it from him and end everything that way, he
would never know. Beautiful what he could have achieved with that
tire iron. "Put it down! I'll open your fuckin' head with it! Fuckin'
put it down!" And the Jew put it down. Luckily for the Jew, he put it
down.

After he made it home that night (never know how he did that

either) and right through to the early hours of the morning—when
it took five men from the fire department, five buddies of his, to
hold him down and get him into restraints and drive him over to
Northampton—Lester saw it all, everything, all at once, right there
in his own house enduring the heat, enduring the rain, the mud, gi-
ant ants, killer bees on his own linoleum floor just beside the

kitchen table, being sick with diarrhea, headaches, sick from no
food and no water, short of ammo, certain this is his last night,
waiting for it to happen, Foster stepping on the booby trap, Quillen
drowning, himself almost drowning, freaking out, throwing gre-
nades in every direction and shouting "I don't want to die," the
warplanes all mixed up and shooting at them, Drago losing a leg, an
arm, his nose, Conrity's burned body sticking to his hands, unable
to get a chopper to land, the chopper saying they cannot land be-
cause we are under attack and him so fucking angry knowing that
he is going to die that he is trying to shoot it down, shoot down our
own chopper—the most inhuman night he ever witnessed and it is
right there now in his own scumbag house, and the longest night
too, his longest night on earth and petrified with every move he
makes, guys hollering and shitting and crying, himself unprepared
to hear so much crying, guys hit in the face and dying, taking their
last breath and dying, Conrity's body all over his hands, Drago
bleeding all over the place, Lester trying to shake somebody dead
awake and hollering, screaming without stopping, "I don't want to
die." No time out from death. No break time from death. No run-
ning from death. No letup from death. Battling death right through
till morning and everything intense. The fear intense, the anger in-
tense, no helicopter willing to land and the terrible smell of Drago's
blood there in his own fucking house. He did not know how bad
it could smell. EVERYTHING SO INTENSE AND EVERYBODY
FAR FROM HOME AND ANGRY ANGRY ANGRY ANGRY
RAGE!

Nearly all the way to Northampton—till they couldn't stand it

anymore and gagged him—Farley is digging in late at night and
waking up in the morning to find that he's slept in someone's grave
with the maggots. "Please!" he cried. "No more of this! No more!"
And so they had no choice but to shut him up.

At the VA hospital, a place to which he could be brought only by

force and from which he'd been running for years—fleeing his
whole life from the hospital of a government he could not deal
with—they put him on the lockup ward, tied him to the bed,

rehydrated him, stabilized him, detoxified him, got him off the al-
cohol, treated him for liver damage, and then, during the six weeks
that followed, every morning in his group therapy session he re-
counted how Rawley and Les Junior had died. He told them all
what happened, told them every day what had failed to happen
when he saw the suffocated faces of his two little kids and knew for
sure that they were dead.

"Numb," he said. "Fuckin' numb. No emotions. Numb to the

death of my own kids. My son's eyes are rolled in back of his head
and he has no pulse. He has no heartbeat. My son isn't fucking
breathing. My son. Little Les. The only son I will ever have. But I did
not feel anything. I was acting as if he was a stranger. Same with
Rawley. She was a stranger. My little girl. That fucking Vietnam,
you caused this! After all these years the war is over, and you caused
this! All my feelings are all fucked up. I feel like I've been hit on the
side of the head with a two-by-four when nothing is happening.
Then something is happening, something fucking huge, I don't feel
a fucking thing. Numbed out. My kids are dead, but my body is
numb and my mind is blank. Vietnam. That's why! I never did cry
for my kids. He was five and she was eight. I said to myself, 'Why
can't I feel?' I said, 'Why didn't I save them? Why couldn't I save
them?' Payback. Payback! I kept thinking about Vietnam. About all
the times I think I died. That's how I began to know that I can't die.
Because I died already. Because I died already in Vietnam. Because I
am a man who fucking died"

The group consisted of Vietnam vets like Farley except for two

from the Gulf War, crybabies who got a little sand in their eyes in
a four-day ground war. A hundred-hour war. A bunch of waiting in
the desert. The Vietnam vets were men who, in their postwar lives,
had themselves been through the worst—divorce, booze, drugs,
crime, the police, jail, the devastating lowness of depression, un-
controllable crying, wanting to scream, wanting to smash some-
thing, the hands trembling and the body twitching and the tight-
ness in the face and the sweats from head to toe from reliving the
metal flying and the brilliant explosions and the severed limbs,

THE  HUMAN  STAIN

from reliving the killing of the prisoners and the families and the
old ladies and the kids—and so, though they nodded their heads
about Rawley and Little Les and understood how he couldn't feel
for them when he saw them with their eyes rolled back because he
himself was dead, they nonetheless agreed, these really ill guys (in
that rare moment when any of them could manage to talk about
anybody other than themselves wandering around the streets ready
to snap and yelling "Why?" at the sky, about anybody else not get-
ting the respect they should receive, about anybody else not being
happy until they were dead and buried and forgotten), that Farley
had better put it behind him and get on with his life.

Get on with his life. He knows it's shit, but it's all he has. Get on

with it. Okay.

He was let out of the hospital late in August determined to do

that. And with the help of a support group that he joined, and one
guy in particular who walked with a cane and whose name was
Louie Borrero, he succeeded at least halfway; it was tough, but with
Louie's help he was doing it more or less, was on the wagon for
nearly three whole months, right up until November. But then—
and not because of something somebody said to him or because of
something he saw on TV or because of the approach of another
familyless Thanksgiving, but because there was no alternative for
Farley, no way to prevent the past from building back up, building
up and calling him to action and demanding from him an enor-
mous response—instead of it all being behind him, it was in front
of him.

Once again, it was his life

Slipping the Punch

WHEN COLEMAN went down to Athena the next day to ask
what could be done to ensure against Farley's ever again trespassing
on his property, the lawyer, Nelson Primus, told him what he did
not want to hear: that he should consider ending his love affair.
He'd first consulted Primus at the outset of the spooks incident
and, because of the sound advice Primus had given—and because
of a strain of cocky bluntness in the young attorney's manner remi-
niscent of himself at Primus's age, because of a repugnance in Pri-
mus for sentimental nonessentials that he made no effort to dis-
guise behind the regular-guy easygoingness prevailing among the
other lawyers in town—it was Primus to whom he'd brought the
Delphine Roux letter.

Primus was in his early thirties, the husband of a young Ph.D.—

a philosophy professor whom Coleman had hired some four years
earlier—and the father of two small children. In a New England
college town like Athena, where most all the professionals were
outfitted for work by L. L. Bean, this sleekly good-looking, raven-
haired young man, tall, trim, athletically flexible, appeared at his
office every morning in crisply tailored suits, gleaming black shoes,
and starched white shirts discreetly monogrammed, attire that be-
spoke not only a sweeping self-confidence and sense of personal
significance but a loathing for slovenliness of any kind—and that

THE  HUMAN  STAIN

suggested as well that Nelson Primus was hungry for something
more than an office above the Talbots shop across from the green.
His wife was teaching here, so for now he was here. But not for
long. A young panther in cufflinks and a pinstriped suit—a panther
ready to pounce.

"I don't doubt that Farley's psychopathic," Primus told him,

measuring each word with staccato exactitude and keeping a sharp
watch on Coleman as he spoke. "I'd worry if he were stalking me.
But did he stalk you before you took up with his ex-wife? He didn't
know who you were. The Delphine Roux letter is something else
entirely. You wanted me to write to her—against my better judg-
ment I did that for you. You wanted an expert to analyze the hand-
writing—against my better judgment I got you somebody to an-
alyze the handwriting. You wanted me to send the handwriting
analysis to her lawyer—against my better judgment I sent him the
results. Even though I wished you'd had it in you to treat a minor
nuisance for what it was, I did whatever you instructed me to do.
But Lester Farley is no minor nuisance. Delphine Roux can't hold a
candle to Farley, not as a psychopath and not as an adversary.
Farley's is the world that Faunia only barely managed to survive
and that she can't help but bring with her when she comes through
your door. Lester Farley works on the road crew, right? We get a re-
straining order on Farley and your secret is all over your quiet little
backwoods town. Soon it's all over this town, it's all over the college,
and what you started out with is going to bear no resemblance to
the malevolent puritanism with which you will be tarred and feath-
ered. I remember the precision with which the local comic weekly
failed to understand the ridiculous charge against you and the
meaning of your resignation. 'Ex-Dean Leaves College under Racist
Cloud.' I remember the caption below your photograph. 'A deni-
grating epithet used in class forces Professor Silk into retirement.' I
remember what it was like for you then, I think I know what it's like
now, and I believe I know what it will be like in the future, when the
whole county is privy to the sexcapades of the guy who left the col-
lege under the racist cloud. I don't mean to imply that what goes on

behind your bedroom door is anybody's business but yours. I know
it should not be like this. It's 1998. It's years now since Janis Joplin
and Norman O. Brown changed everything for the better. But we've
got people here in the Berkshires, hicks and college professors alike,
who just won't bring their values into line and politely give way to
the sexual revolution. Narrow-minded churchgoers, sticklers for
propriety, all sorts of retrograde folks eager to expose and punish
guys like you. They can heat things up for you, Coleman—and not
the way your Viagra does."

Clever boy to come up with the Viagra all on his own. Showing

off, but he's helped before, thought Coleman, so don't interrupt,
don't put him down, however irritating his being so with-it is.
There are no compassionate chinks in his armor? Fine with me. You
asked his advice, so hear him out. You don't want to make a mistake
for lack of being warned.

"Sure I can get you a restraining order," Primus told him. "But is

that going to restrain him? A restraining order is going to inflame
him. I got you a handwriting expert, I can get you your restraining
order, I can get you a bulletproof vest. But what I can't provide
is what you're never going to know as long as you're involved
with this woman: a scandal-free, censure-free, Farley-free life. The
peace of mind that comes of not being stalked. Or caricatured. Or
snubbed. Or misjudged. Is she HIV negative, by the way? Did you
have her tested, Coleman? Do you use a condom, Coleman?"

Hip as he imagines himself, he really can't get this old man and

sex, can he? Seems utterly anomalous to him. But who can grasp at
thirty-two that at seventy-one it's exactly the same? He thinks, How
and why does he do this? My old-fart virility and the trouble it
causes. At thirty-two, thought Coleman, I couldn't have under-
stood it either. Otherwise, however, he speaks with the authority of
someone ten or twenty years his senior about the way the world
works. And how much experience can he have had, how much ex-
posure to life's difficulties, to speak in such a patronizing manner to
a man more than twice his age? Very, very little, if not none.
"Coleman, if you don't," Primus was saying, "does she use some-

thing? And if she says she does, can you be sure it's so? Even down-
and-out cleaning women have been known to shade the truth from
time to time, and sometimes even to seek remedy for all the shit
they've taken. What happens when Faunia Farley gets pregnant?
She may think the way a lot of women have been thinking ever
since the act of begetting a bastard was destigmatized by Jim Mor-
rison and The Doors. Faunia might very well want to go ahead
and become the mother of a distinguished retired professor's child
despite all your patient reasoning to the contrary. Becoming the
mother of a distinguished professor's child might be an uplift-
ing change after having been the mother of the children of a de-
ranged total failure. And, once she's pregnant, if she decides that
she doesn't want to be a menial anymore, that she wishes never
again to work at anything, an enlightened court will not hesitate to
direct you to support the child and the single mother. Now, I can
represent you in the paternity suit, and if and when I have to, I will
fight to keep your liability down to half your pension. I will do ev-
erything in my power to see that something is left in your bank ac-
count as you advance into your eighties. Coleman, listen to me: this
is a bad deal. In every possible way, it is a bad deal. If you go to your
hedonist counselor, he's going to tell you something else, but I am
your counselor at law, and I'm going to tell you that it's a terrible
deal. If I were you, I would not put myself in the path of Lester
Farley's wild grievance. If I were you, I would rip up the Faunia
contract and get out."

Everything he had to say having been said, Primus got up from

behind his desk, a large, well-polished desk conscientiously kept
cleared of all papers and files, pointedly bare of everything but the
framed photographs of his young professor wife and their two chil-
dren, a desk whose surface epitomized the unsullied clean slate and
could only lead Coleman to conclude that there was nothing disor-
ganized standing in the way of this voluble young man, neither
weaknesses of character nor extreme views nor rash compulsions
nor even the possibility of inadvertent error, nothing ill or well con-
cealed that would ever crop up to prevent him from attaining every

SLIPPING  THE  PUNCH

professional reward and bourgeois success. There'll be no spooks
in Nelson Primus's life, no Faunia Farleys or Lester Farleys, no
Markies to despise him or Lisas to desert him. Primus has drawn
the line and no incriminating impurity will be permitted to breach
it. But didn't I too draw the line and draw it no less rigorously? Was
I less vigilant in the pursuit of legitimate goals and of an estimable,
even-keeled life? Was I any less confident marching in step behind
my own impregnable scruples? Was I any less arrogant? Isn't this
the very way I took on the old guard in my first hundred days as
Roberts's strongman? Isn't this how I drove them crazy and pushed
them out? Was I any less ruthlessly sure of myself? Yet that one
word did it. By no means the English language's most inflam-
matory, most heinous, most horrifying word, and yet word enough
to lay bare, for all to see, to judge, to find wanting the truth of who
and what I am.

The lawyer who'd not minced a single word—who'd laced virtu-

ally every one of them with a cautionary sarcasm that amounted
to outright admonishment, whose purpose he would not disguise
from his distinguished elderly client with a single circumlocution
—came around from behind his desk to escort Coleman out of the
office and then, at the doorway, went so far as to accompany him
down the stairway and out onto the sunny street. It was largely on
behalf of Beth, his wife, that Primus had wanted to be sure to say
everything he could to Coleman as tellingly as he could, to say what
had to be said no matter how seemingly unkind, in the hope of pre-
venting this once considerable college personage from disgracing
himself any further. That spooks incident—coinciding as it did
with the sudden death of his wife—had so seriously unhinged
Dean Silk that not only had he taken the rash step of resigning (and
just when the case against him had all but run its spurious course),
but now, two full years later, he remained unable to gauge what was
and wasn't in his long-term interest. To Primus, it seemed almost as
though Coleman Silk had not been unfairly diminished enough, as
though, with a doomed man's cunning obtuseness, like someone
who falls foul of a god, he was in crazy pursuit of a final, malicious,

degrading assault, an ultimate injustice that would validate his ag-
grievement forever. A guy who'd once enjoyed a lot of power in his
small world seemed not merely unable to defend himself against
the encroachments of a Delphine Roux and a Lester Farley but,
what was equally compromising to his embattled self-image, un-
able to shield himself against the pitiful sorts of temptations with
which the aging male will try to compensate for the loss of a spir-
ited, virile manhood. Primus could tell from Coleman's demeanor
that he'd guessed right about the Viagra. Another chemical menace,
the young man thought. The guy might as well be smoking crack,
for all the good that Viagra is doing him.

Out on the street, the two shook hands. "Coleman," said Primus,

whose wife, that very morning, when he'd said that he'd be seeing
Dean Silk, had expressed her chagrin about his leavetaking from
Athena, again speaking contemptuously of Delphine Roux, whom
she despised for her role in the spooks affair—"Coleman," Primus
said, "Faunia Farley is not from your world. You got a good look
last night at the world that's shaped her, that's quashed her, and
that, for reasons you know as well as I do, she'll never escape. Some-
thing worse than last night can come of all this, something much
worse. You're no longer battling in a world where they are out to
destroy you and drive you from your job so as to replace you with
one of their own. You're no longer battling a well-mannered gang
of elitist egalitarians who hide their ambition behind high-minded
ideals. You're battling now in a world where nobody's ruthlessness
bothers to cloak itself in humanitarian rhetoric. These are people
whose fundamental feeling about life is that they have been fucked
over unfairly right down the line. What you suffered because of
how your case was handled by the college, awful as that was, is what
these people feel every minute of every hour of..."

That's enough was by now so clearly written in Coleman's gaze

that even Primus realized that it was time to shut up. Throughout
the meeting, Coleman had silently listened, suppressing his feel-
ings, trying to keep an open mind and to ignore the too apparent
delight Primus took in floridly lecturing on the virtues of prudence

a professional man nearly forty years his senior. In an attempt to
humor himself, Coleman had been thinking, Being angry with me
makes them all feel better—it liberates everyone to tell me I'm
wrong. But by the time they were out on the street, it was no longer
possible to isolate the argument from the utterance—or to separate
himself from the man in charge he'd always been, the man in
charge and the man deferred to. For Primus to speak directly to the
point to his client had not required quite this much satiric orna-
mentation. If the purpose was to advise in a persuasive lawyerly
fashion, a very small amount of mockery would have more ef-
fectively done the job. But Primus's sense of himself as brilliant
and destined for great things seemed to have got the best of him,
thought Coleman, and so the mockery of a ridiculous old fool
made potent by a pharmaceutical compound selling for ten dollars
a pill had known no bounds.

"You're a vocal master of extraordinary loquaciousness, Nelson.

So perspicacious. So fluent. A vocal master of the endless, ostenta-
tiously overelaborate sentence. And so rich with contempt for every
last human problem you've never had to face." The impulse was
overwhelming to grab the lawyer by the shirt front and slam the
insolent son of a bitch through Talbots's window. Instead, draw-
ing back, reining himself in, strategically speaking as softly as he
could—yet not nearly so mindfully as he might have—Coleman
said, "I never again want to hear that self-admiring voice of yours
or see your smug fucking lily-white face."

"'Lily-white'?" Primus said to his wife that evening. "Why 'lily-
white'? One can never hold people to what they lash out with when
they think they've been made use of and deprived of their dignity.
But did I mean to seem to be attacking him? Of course not. It's
worse than that. Worse because this old guy has lost his bearings
and I wanted to help him. Worse because the man is on the brink of
carrying a mistake over into a catastrophe and I wanted to stop him.
What he took to be an attack on him was actually a wrong-headed
attempt to be taken seriously by him, to impress him. I failed, Beth,

completely mismanaged it. Maybe because I was intimidated. In
his slight, little-guy way, the man is a force. I never knew him as
the big dean. I've known him only as someone in trouble. But you
feel the presence. You see why people were intimidated by him.
Somebody's there when he's sitting there. Look, I don't know what
it is. It's not easy to know what to make of somebody you've seen
half a dozen times in your life. Maybe it's primarily something stu-
pid about me. But whatever caused it, I made every amateurish
mistake in the book. Psychopathology, Viagra, The Doors, Norman
O. Brown, contraception, AIDS. I knew everything about every-
thing. Particularly if it happened before I was born, I knew every-
thing that could possibly be known. I should have been concise,
matter-of-fact, unsubjective; instead I was provocative. I wanted to
help him and instead I insulted him and made things worse for
him. No, I don't fault him for unloading on me like that. But,
honey, the question remains: why white?"

Coleman hadn't been on the Athena campus for two years and by
now no longer went to town at all if he could help it. He didn't any
longer hate each and every member of the Athena faculty, he just
wanted nothing to do with them, fearful that should he stop to
chat, even idly, he'd be incapable of concealing his pain or conceal-
ing himself concealing his pain—unable to prevent himself from
standing there seething or, worse, from coming apart and breaking
unstoppably into an overly articulate version of the wronged man's
blues. A few days after his resignation, he'd opened new accounts at
the bank and the supermarket up in Blackwell, a depressed mill
town on the river some eighteen miles from Athena, and even got a
card for the local library there, determined to use it, however mea-
ger the collection, rather than to wander ever again through the
stacks at Athena. He joined the YMCA in Blackwell, and instead of
taking his swim at the Athena college pool at the end of the day or
exercising on a mat in the Athena gym as he'd done after work for
nearly thirty years, he did his laps a couple of times a week at the
less agreeable pool of the Blackwell Y—he even went upstairs to the

rundown gym and, for the first time since graduate school, began,
at a far slower pace than back in the forties, to work out with the
speed bag and to hit the heavy bag. To go north to Blackwell took
twice as long as driving down the mountain to Athena, but in
Blackwell he was unlikely to run into ex-colleagues, and when he
did, it was less self-consciously fraught with feeling for him to nod
unsmilingly and go on about his business than it would have been
on the pretty old streets of Athena, where there was not a street
sign, a bench, a tree, not a monument on the green, that didn't
somehow remind him of himself before he was the college racist
and everything was different. The string of shops across from the
green hadn't even been there until his tenure as dean had brought
all sorts of new people to Athena as staff and as students and as par-
ents of students, and so, over time, he'd wound up changing the
community no less than he had shaken up the college. The mori-
bund antique shop, the bad restaurant, the subsistence-level gro-
cery store, the provincial liquor store, the hick-town barbershop,
the nineteenth-century haberdasher, the understocked bookshop,
the genteel tearoom, the dark pharmacy, the depressing tavern, the
newspaperless newsdealer, the empty, enigmatic magic shop—all of
them had disappeared, to be replaced by establishments where you
could eat a decent meal and get a good cup of coffee and have a pre-
scription filled and buy a good bottle of wine and find a book about
something other than the Berkshires and also find something other
than long underwear to keep you warm in wintertime. The "revolu-
tion of quality" that he had once been credited with imposing on
the Athena faculty and curriculum, he had, albeit inadvertently, be-
stowed on Town Street as well. Which only added to the pain and
surprise of being the alien he was.

By now, two years down the line, he felt himself besieged not so

much by them—apart from Delphine Roux, who at Athena cared
any longer about Coleman Silk and the spooks incident?—as by
weariness with his own barely submerged, easily galvanized bitter-
ness; down in the streets of Athena, he now felt (to begin with) a
greater aversion to himself than to those who, out of indifference or

cowardice or ambition, had failed to mount the slightest protest in
his behalf. Educated people with Ph.D.s, people he had himself
hired because he believed that they were capable of thinking rea-
sonably and independently, had turned out to have no inclination
to weigh the preposterous evidence against him and reach an ap-
propriate conclusion. Racist: at Athena College, suddenly the most
emotionally charged epithet you could be stuck with, and to that
emotionalism (and to fear for their personnel files and future pro-
motions) his entire faculty had succumbed. "Racist" spoken with
the official-sounding resonance, and every last potential ally had
scurried for cover.

Walk up to the campus? It was summer. School was out. After

nearly four decades at Athena, after all that had been destroyed and
lost, after all that he had gone through to get there, why not? First
"spooks," now "lily-white"—who knows what repellent deficiency
will be revealed with the next faintly antiquated locution, the next
idiom almost charmingly out of time that comes flying from his
mouth? How one is revealed or undone by the perfect word. What
burns away the camouflage and the covering and the concealment?
This, the right word uttered spontaneously, without one's even hav-
ing to think.

"For the thousandth time: I said spooks because I meant spooks.

My father was a saloon keeper, but he insisted on precision in my
language, and I have kept the faith with him. Words have mean-
ings—with only a seventh-grade education, even my father knew
that much. Back of the bar, he kept two things to help settle argu-
ments among his patrons: a blackjack and a dictionary. My best
friend, he told me, the dictionary—and so it is for me today. Be-
cause if we look in the dictionary, what do we find as the first
meaning of 'spook'? The primary meaning, 'i. Informal, a ghost;
specter.'" "But Dean Silk, that is not the way it was taken. Let me
read to you the second dictionary meaning. '2. Disparaging. A Ne-
gro.' That's the way it was taken—and you can see the logic of that
as well: Does anybody know them, or are they blacks whom you
don't know?" "Sir, if my intention was to say, 'Does anybody know

SLIPPING  THE   PUNCH

them, or do you not know them because they are black?' that is
what I would have said. 'Does anybody know them, or do none
of you know them because these happen to be two black stu-
dents? Does anybody know them, or are they blacks whom nobody
knows?' If I had meant that, I would have said it just like that. But
how could I know they were black students if I had never laid eyes
on them and, other than their names, had no knowledge of them?
What I did know, indisputably, was that they were invisible stu-
dents—and the word for invisible, for a ghost, for a specter, is the
word that I used in its primary meaning: spook. Look at the ad-
jective 'spooky,' which is the next dictionary entry after 'spook.'
Spooky. A word we all remember from childhood, and what does it
mean? According to the unabridged dictionary: 'Informal, 1. like or
befitting a spook or ghost; suggestive of spooks. 2. eerie; scary. 3.
(esp. of horses) nervous; skittish.' Especially of horses. Now, would
anyone care to suggest that my two students were being character-
ized by me as horses as well? No? But why not? While you're at it,
why not that, too?"
One last look at Athena, and then let the disgrace be complete.

Silky. Silky Silk. The name by which he had not been known for
over fifty years, and yet he all but expected to hear someone shout-
ing, "Hey, Silky!" as though he were back in East Orange, walking
up Central Avenue after school—instead of crossing Athena's Town
Street and, for the first time since his resignation, starting up the
hill to the campus—walking up Central Avenue with his sister,
Ernestine, listening to that crazy story she had to tell about what
she'd overheard the evening before when Dr. Fensterman, the Jew-
ish doctor, the big surgeon from Mom's hospital down in Newark,
had come to call on their parents. While Coleman had been at the
gym working out with the track team, Ernestine was home in the
kitchen doing her homework and from there could hear Dr. Fen-
sterman, seated in the living room with Mom and Dad, explaining
why it was of the utmost importance to him and Mrs. Fensterman
that their son Bertram graduate as class valedictorian. As the Silks

knew, it was now Coleman who was first in their class, with Bert
second, though behind Coleman by a single grade. The one B that
Bert had received on his report card the previous term, a B in phys-
ics that by all rights should have been an A—that B was all that was
separating the top two students in the senior class. Dr. Fensterman
explained to Mr. and Mrs. Silk that Bert wanted to follow his father
into medicine, but that to do so it was essential for him to have a
perfect record, and not merely perfect in college but extraordinary
going back to kindergarten. Perhaps the Silks were not aware of the
discriminatory quotas that were designed to keep Jews out of medi-
cal school, especially the medical schools at Harvard and Yale,
where Dr. and Mrs. Fensterman were confident that, were Bert
given the opportunity, he could emerge as the brightest of the
brightest. Because of the tiny Jewish quotas in most medical
schools. Dr. Fensterman had had himself to go down to Alabama
for his schooling, and there he'd seen at first hand all that colored
people have to strive against. Dr. Fensterman knew that prejudice
in academic institutions against colored students was far worse
than it was against Jews. He knew the kind of obstacles that the
Silks themselves had had to overcome to achieve all that distin-
guished them as a model Negro family. He knew the tribulations
that Mr. Silk had had to endure ever since the optical shop went
bankrupt in the Depression. He knew that Mr. Silk was, like him-
self, a college graduate, and he knew that in working for the rail-
road as a steward—"That's what he called a waiter, Coleman, a
'steward'"—he was employed at a level in no way commensurate
with his professional training. Mrs. Silk he of course knew from the
hospital. In Dr. Fensterman's estimation, there was no finer nurse
on the hospital staff, no nurse more intelligent, knowledgeable, reli-
able, or capable than Mrs. Silk—and that included the nursing su-
pervisor herself. In his estimation, Gladys Silk should long ago have
been appointed the head nurse on the medical-surgical floor; one
of the promises that Dr. Fensterman wanted to make to the Silks
was that he was prepared to do everything he could with the chief
of staff to procure that very position for Mrs. Silk upon the retire-

ment of Mrs. Noonan, the current medical-surgical head nurse.
Moreover, he was prepared to assist the Silks with an interest-free,
nonreturnable "loan" of three thousand dollars, payable in a lump
sum when Coleman would be off to college and the family was sure
to be incurring additional expenses. And in exchange he asked not
so much as they might think. As salutatorian, Coleman would still
be the highest-ranking colored student in the 1944 graduating class,
not to mention the highest-ranking colored student ever to gradu-
ate E. O. With his grade average, Coleman would more than likely
be the highest-ranking colored student in the county, even in the
state, and his having finished high school as salutatorian rather
than as valedictorian would make no difference whatsoever when
he enrolled at Howard University. The chances were negligible of
his suffering the slightest hardship with a ranking like that. Cole-
man would lose nothing, while the Silks would have three thousand
dollars to put toward the children's college expenses; in addition,
with Dr. Fensterman's support and backing, Gladys Silk could very
well rise, in just a few years, to become the first colored head nurse
on any floor of any hospital in the city of Newark. And from
Coleman nothing more was required than his choosing his two
weakest subjects and, instead of getting A's on the final exams, get-
ting B's. It would then be up to Bert to get an A in all his subjects—
doing that would constitute holding up his end of the bargain. And
should Bert let everyone down by not working hard enough to get
all those A's, then the two boys would finish in a flat-footed tie—or
Coleman could even emerge as valedictorian, and Dr. Fensterman
would still make good on his promises. Needless to say, the ar-
rangement would be kept confidential by everyone involved.

So delighted was he by what he heard that Coleman broke loose

from Ernestine's grasp and burst away up the street, in exuberant
delight running up Central to Evergreen and then back, crying
aloud, "My two weakest subjects—which are those?" It was as
though in attributing to Coleman an academic weakness, Dr. Fen-
sterman had told the most hilarious joke. "What'd they say, Ern?
What did Dad say?" "I couldn't hear. He said it too low." "What did

THE   HUMAN   STAIN

Mom say?" "I don't know. I couldn't hear Mom either. But what
they were saying after the doctor left, I heard that." "Tell me!
What?" "Daddy said, 'I wanted to kill that man.'" "He did?" "Really.
Yes." "And Mom?" "'I just bit my tongue.' That's what Mom said—'I
just bit my tongue.'" "But you didn't hear what they said to him?'
"No." "Well, I'll tell you one thing—I'm not going to do it." "Of
course not," Ernestine said. "But suppose Dad told him I would?"
"Are you crazy, Coleman?" "Ernie, three thousand dollars is more
than Dad makes in a whole year. Ernie, three thousand dollars!"
And the thought of Dr. Fensterman handing over to his father a
big paper bag stuffed with all that money set him running again,
goofily taking the imaginary low hurdles (for successive years now,
he had been Essex County high school champ in low hurdles and
run second in the hundred-yard dash) up to Evergreen and back.
Another triumph—that's what he was thinking. Yet another rec-
ord-breaking triumph for the great, the incomparable, the one
and only Silky Silk! He was class valedictorian, all right, as well as
a track star, but as he was also only seventeen, Dr. Fensterman's
proposal meant no more to him than that he was of the greatest
importance to just about everyone. The larger picture he didn't
get yet.

In East Orange, where mostly everyone was white, either poor

Italian—and living up at the Orange edge of town or down by
Newark's First Ward—or Episcopalian and rich—and living in the
big houses out by Upsala or around South Harrison—there were
fewer Jews even than there were Negroes, and yet it was the Jews
and their kids who these days loomed larger than anyone in Cole-
man's extracurricular life. First there was Doc Chizner, who had as
good as adopted him the year before, when Coleman joined his
evening boxing class, and now there was Dr. Fensterman offering
three thousand dollars for Coleman to place second academically
so as to enable Bert to come in first. Doc Chizner was a dentist who
loved boxing. Went to the fights whenever he had a chance—in Jer-
sey at Laurel Garden and at the Meadowbrook Bowl, to New York
to the Garden and out to St. Nick's. People would say, "You think

you know fights until you sit next to Doc. Sit next to Doc Chizner,
and you realize you're not watching the same fight." Doc offici-
ated at amateur fights all over Essex County, including the Golden
Gloves in Newark, and to his local classes in boxing Jewish parents
from all over the Oranges, from Maplewood, from Irvington—
from as far away as the Weequahic section over at Newark's south-
west corner—sent their sons to learn how to defend themselves.
Coleman had wound up in Doc Chizner's class not because he
didn't know how but because his own father had found out that
since his second year of high school, after track practice, all on his
own—and as often sometimes as three times a week—Coleman
had been sneaking down to the Newark Boys Club, below High
Street in the Newark slums to Morton Street, and secretly training
to be a fighter. Fourteen years old when he began, a hundred and
eleven pounds, and he would work out there for two hours, loosen
up, spar three rounds, hit the heavy bag, hit the speed bag, skip
rope, do his exercises, and then head home to do his homework. A
couple of times he even got to spar with Cooper Fulham, who the
year before had won the National Championships up in Boston.
Coleman's mother was working a shift and a half, even two shifts
running at the hospital, his father was waiting tables on the train
and hardly at home other than to sleep, his older brother, Walt, was
away first at college, then in the army, and so Coleman came and
went as he liked, swearing Ernestine to secrecy and making sure not
to let his grades slip, in study hall, at night in bed, on the buses back
and forth to Newark—two buses each way—plugging away even
harder than usual at his schoolwork to be sure nobody found out
about Morton Street.

If you wanted to box amateur, the Newark Boys Club was where

you went, and if you were good and you were between thirteen and
eighteen, you got matched up against guys from the Boys Club in
Paterson, in Jersey City, in Butler, from the Ironbound PAL, and so
on. There were loads of kids down at the Boys Club, some from
Rahway, from Linden, from Elizabeth, a couple from as far away as
Morristown, there was a deaf-mute they called Dummy who came

from Belleville, but mostly they were from Newark and all of them
were colored, though the two guys who ran the club were white.
One was a cop in West Side Park, Mac Machrone, and he had a pis-
tol, and he told Coleman that if he ever found out Coleman wasn't
doing his roadwork, he'd shoot him. Mac believed in speed, and
that's why he believed in Coleman. Speed and pacing and counter-
punching. Once he'd taught Coleman how to stand and how to
move and how to throw the punches, once Mac saw how quickly
the boy learned and how smart he was and how quick his reflexes
were, he began to teach him the finer things. How to move his head.
How to slip punches. How to block punches. How to counter. To
teach him the jab, Mac repeated, "It's like you flick a flea off your
nose. Just flick it off him." He taught Coleman how to win a fight by
using only his jab. Throw the jab, knock the punch down, counter.
A jab comes, you slip it, come over with the right counter. Or you
slip it inside, you come over with a hook. Or you just duck down,
hit him a right to the heart, a left hook to the stomach. Slight as he
was, Coleman would sometimes quickly grab the jab with both his
hands, pull the guy and then hook him to the stomach, come up,
hook him to the head. "Knock the punch down. Counterpunch.
You're a counterpuncher, Silky. That's what you are, that's all you
are." Then they went to Paterson. His first amateur tournament
fight. This kid would throw a jab and Coleman would lean back,
but his feet would be planted and he could come back and counter
the kid with a right, and he kept catching him like that for the
whole fight. The kid kept doing it, so Coleman kept doing it and
won all three rounds. At the Boys Club, that became Silky Silk's
style. When he threw punches, it was so nobody could say he was
standing there doing nothing. Mostly he would wait for the other
guy to throw, then he'd throw two, three back, and then he'd get out
and wait again. Coleman could hit his opponent more by waiting
for him to lead than by leading him. The result was that by the time
Coleman was sixteen, in Essex and Hudson counties alone, at ama-
teur shows at the armory, at the Knights of Pythias, at exhibitions
for the veterans at the veterans hospital, he must have beaten three

guys who were Golden Gloves champs. As he figured it, he could by
then have won 112,118,126 ... except there was no way he could
fight in the Golden Gloves without its getting in the papers and his
family finding out. And then they found out anyway. He didn't
know how. He didn't have to. They found out because somebody
told them. Simple as that.

They were all sitting down to dinner on a Sunday, after church,

when his father said, "How did you do, Coleman?"

"How did I do at what?"
"Last night. At the Knights of Pythias. How did you do?"
"What's the Knights of Pythias?" Coleman asked.
"Do you think I was born yesterday, son? The Knights of Pythias

is where they had the tournament last night. How many fights on
the card?"

"Fifteen."
"And how did you do?"
"I won."
"How many fights have you won so far? In tournaments. In exhi-

bitions. How many since you began?"

"Eleven."
"And how many have you lost?"
"So far, none."
"And how much did you get for the watch?"
"What watch?"
"The watch you won at the Lyons Veterans Hospital. The watch

the vets gave you for winning the fight. The watch you hocked
on Mulberry Street. Down in Newark, Coleman—the watch you
hocked in Newark last week."

The man knew everything.
"What do you think I got?" Coleman dared to reply, though not

looking up as he spoke—instead looking at the embroidered design
on the good Sunday tablecloth.

"You got two dollars, Coleman. When are you planning on turn-

ing pro?"

"I don't do it for money," he said, still with his eyes averted. "I

don't care about money. I do it for enjoyment. It's not a sport you
take up if you don't enjoy it."

"You know, if I were your father, Coleman, you know what I'd

tell you now?"

"You are my father," Coleman said.
"Oh, am I?" his father said.
"Well, sure..."
"Well—I'm not sure at all. I was thinking that maybe Mac

Machrone, at the Newark Boys Club, was your father."

"Come on, Dad. Mac's my trainer."
"I see. So who then is your father, if I may ask?"
"You know. You are. You are, Dad."
"I am? Yes?"
"No!" Coleman shouted. "No, you're not!" And here, at the very

start of Sunday dinner, he ran out of the house and for nearly an
hour he did his roadwork, up Central Avenue and over the Orange
line, and then through Orange all the way to the West Orange line,
and then crossing over on Watchung Avenue to Rosedale Cemetery,
and then turning south down Washington to Main, running and
throwing punches, sprinting, then just running, then just sprinting,
then shadowboxing all the way back to Brick Church Station, and
finally sprinting the stretch, sprinting to the house, going back in-
side to where the family was eating their dessert and where he knew
to sit back down at his place, far calmer than when he had bolted,
and to wait for his father to resume where he had left off. The father
who never lost his temper. The father who had another way of beat-
ing you down. With words. With speech. With what he called "the
language of Chaucer, Shakespeare, and Dickens." With the English
language that no one could ever take away from you and that Mr.
Silk richly sounded, always with great fullness and clarity and bra-
vado, as though even in ordinary conversation he were reciting
Marc Antony's speech over the body of Caesar. Each of his three
children had been given a middle name drawn from Mr. Silk's best-
memorized play, in his view English literature's high point and
the most educational study of treason ever written: the eldest Silk

son was Walter Antony, the second son, Coleman Brutus; Ernes-
tine Calpurnia, their younger sister, took her middle name from
Caesar's loyal wife.

Mr. Silk's life in business for himself had come to a bitter end

with the closing of the banks. It had taken him quite a time to get
over losing the optician's store up in Orange, if he ever did. Poor
Daddy, Mother would say, he always wanted to work for himself.
He'd attended college in the South, in Georgia where he came
from—Mother was from New Jersey—and took farming and ani-
mal husbandry. But then he quit and up north, in Trenton, he went
to optician's school. Then he was drafted into the army for World
War I, then he met Mother, moved with her to East Orange, opened
the store, bought the house, then there was the crash, and now he
was a waiter on a dining car. But if he couldn't in the dining car, at
least at home he was able to speak with all his deliberateness and
precision and directness and could wither you with words. He was
very fussy about his children's speaking properly. Growing up, they
never said, "See the bow-wow." They didn't even say, "See the dog-
gie." They said, "See the Doberman. See the beagle. See the terrier."
They learned things had classifications. They learned the power of
naming precisely. He was teaching them English all the time. Even
the kids who came into the house, his children's friends, had their
English corrected by Mr. Silk.

When he was an optician and wore a white medical smock over a

ministerial dark suit and was working more or less regular hours,
he would sit after dessert and read the newspaper at the dinner ta-
ble. They all would read from it. Each one of the children, even the
baby, even Ernestine, would have to take a turn at the Newark Eve-
ning News, and not with the funnies. His mother, Coleman's grand-
mother, had been taught to read by her mistress and after Emanci-
pation had gone to what was then called Georgia State Normal
and Industrial School for Colored. His father, Coleman's paternal
grandfather, had been a Methodist minister. In the Silk family they
had read all the old classics. In the Silk family the children were not
taken to prizefights, they were taken to the Metropolitan Museum

of Art in New York to see the armor. They were taken to the Hayden
Planetarium to learn about the solar system. Regularly they were
taken to the Museum of Natural History. And then in 1937, on the
Fourth of July, despite the cost, they were all taken by Mr. Silk to the
Music Box Theatre on Broadway to see George M. Cohan in I'd
Rather Be Right. Coleman still remembered what his father told his
brother, Uncle Bobby, on the phone the next day. "When the cur-
tain came down on George M. Cohan after all his curtain calls, do
you know what the man did? He came out for an hour and sang all
his songs. Every one of them. What better introduction could a
child have to the theater?"

"If I were your father," Coleman's father resumed, while the boy

sat solemnly before his empty plate, "you know what I would tell
you now?"

winded from all the roadwork but because he was chastened by
having told his own father, who was no longer an optician but a
dining car waiter and who would remain a dining car waiter till he
died, that he was not his father.

"I would say, 'You won last night? Good. Now you can retire un-

defeated. You're retired.' That's what I'd say, Coleman."

It was much easier when Coleman spoke to him later, after he

had spent the afternoon doing his homework and after his mother
had a chance to talk and reason with his father. They were all able to
sit more or less peaceably together then in the living room and lis-
ten to Coleman describe the glories of boxing and how, given all the
resources you had to call on to excel, they exceeded even winning at
track.

It was his mother who asked the questions now, and answering

her was no problem. Her younger son was wrapped like a gift in ev-
ery ameliorating dream Gladys Silk had ever had, and the hand-
somer he became and the smarter he became, the more difficult it
was for her to distinguish the child from the dreams. As sensitive
and gentle as she could be with the patients at the hospital, she
could also be, with the other nurses, even with the doctors, with the

white doctors, exacting and stern, imposing on them a code of con-
duct no less stringent than the one she imposed on herself. She
could be that way with Ernestine as well. But never with Coleman.
Coleman got what the patients got: her conscientious kindness and
care. Coleman got just about anything he wanted. The father lead-
ing the way, the mother feeding the love. The old one-two.

"I don't see how you get mad at somebody you don't know. You

especially," she said, "with your happy nature."

"You don't get mad. You just concentrate. It's a sport. You warm

up before a fight. You shadowbox. You get yourself ready for what-
ever is going to come at you."

"If you've never seen the opponent before?" asked his father, with

all the restraint on his sarcasm he could muster.
"All I mean," Coleman said, "is you don't have to get mad."
"But," his mother asked, "what if the other boy is mad?"

"It doesn't matter. It's brains that win, not getting mad. Let him

get mad. Who cares? You have to think. It's like a chess game. Like a
cat and a mouse. You can lead a guy. Last night, I had this guy, he
was about eighteen or nineteen and he was sort of slow. He hit me
with a jab on the top of my head. So the next time he did it, I was
ready for it, and boom. I came over with the right counter and he
didn't know where it came from. I knocked him down. I don't
knock guys down, but I knocked this guy down. And I did it be-
cause I got him into thinking that he could catch me again with this
punch."

"Coleman," his mother said, "I do not like the sound of what I'm

hearing."

He stood up to demonstrate for her. "Look. It was a slow punch.

You see? I saw his jab was slow and he wasn't catching me. It was
nothing that hurt me, Mom. I just was thinking that if he does it
again, I'll slip it and bang over with the right. So when he threw it
again, I saw it coming because it was so slow, and I was able to
counter and catch him. I knocked him down, Mom, but not be-
cause I was angry. Because I box better."
"But these Newark boys you fight. They're nothing like the

THE  HUMAN  STAIN

friends you have," and, with affection, she mentioned the names of
the two other best-behaved, brightest Negro boys in his year at East
Orange High, who were indeed the pals he had lunch with and
hung around with at school. "I see these Newark boys on the street.
These boys are so tough" she said. "Track is so much more civilized
than boxing, so much more like you, Coleman. Dear, you run so
beautifully."

"It doesn't matter how tough they are or how tough they think

they are," he told her. "On the street it matters. But not in the ring.
In the street this guy could probably have beat me silly. But in the
ring? With rules? With gloves? No, no—he couldn't land a punch."

"But what happens when they do hit you? It has to hurt you. The

impact. It must. And that's so dangerous. Your head. Your brain"

"You're rolling with the punch, Mom. That's where they teach

you how to roll your head. Like this, see? That reduces the impact.
Once, and only once, and only because I was a jerk, only because of
my own stupid mistake and because I wasn't used to fighting a
southpaw, did I get a little stunned. And it's only like if you bang
your head against the wall, you feel a little dizzy or shaky. But then
all of a sudden your body comes right back. All you have to do is
just hold on to the guy or move away, and then your head clears up.
Sometimes, you get hit in the nose, your eyes get a little watery for a
second, but that's it. If you know what you're doing, it's not danger-
ous at all."

With that remark, his father had heard enough. "I've seen men

get hit with a punch that they never saw coming. And when that
happens," Mr. Silk said, "their eyes don't get watery—when that
happens, it knocks them cold. Even Joe Louis, if you recall, was
knocked cold—wasn't he? Am I mistaken? And if Joe Louis can be
knocked cold, Coleman, so can you."

"Yeah, but Dad, Schmeling, when he fought Louis that first fight,

he saw a weakness. And the weakness was that when Louis threw
his jab, instead of coming back—" On his feet again, the boy dem-
onstrated to his parents what he meant. "Instead of corning back,
he dropped his left hand—see?—and Schmeling kept coming over

—see?—and that's how Schmeling knocked him out. It's all think-
ing. Really. It is, Dad. I swear to you."
"Don't say that. Don't say, 'I swear to you.'"

"I won't, I won't. But see, if he doesn't come back, where he's

back in position, if he comes here instead, then the guy's going to
come over with his right hand and eventually he's going to catch
him. That's what happened that first time. That's exactly what hap-
pened."

But Mr. Silk had seen plenty of fights, in the army had seen fights

among soldiers staged at night for the troops where fighters were
not only knocked out like Joe Louis but so badly cut up nothing
could be done to stop the bleeding. On his base he had seen colored
fighters who used their heads as their main weapon, who should
have had a glove on their heads, tough street fighters, stupid men
who butted and butted with their heads until the face of the other
fighter was unrecognizable as a face. No, Coleman was to retire un-
defeated, and if he wanted to box for the enjoyment of it, for the
sport, he would do so not at the Newark Boys Club, which to Mr.
Silk was for slum kids, for illiterates and hoodlums bound for either
the gutter or jail, but right there in East Orange, under the auspices
of Doc Chizner, who'd been the dentist for the United Electrical
Workers when Mr. Silk was the optician providing the union's
members with eyeglasses before he lost the business. Doc Chizner
was still a dentist but after hours taught the sons of the Jewish doc-
tors and lawyers and businessmen the basic skills of boxing, and
nobody in his classes, you could be sure, ended up hurt or maimed
for life. For Coleman's father, the Jews, even audaciously unsavory
Jews like Dr. Fensterman, were like Indian scouts, shrewd people
showing the outsider his way in, showing the social possibility,
showing an intelligent colored family how it might be done.

That was how Coleman got to Doc Chizner and became the col-

ored kid whom all the privileged Jewish kids got to know—proba-
bly the only one they would ever know. Quickly Coleman came
to be Doc's assistant, teaching these Jewish kids not exactly the
fine points of how to economize energy and motion that Mac

THE  HUMAN  STAIN

Machrone had taught his ace student but the basics, which was all
they were up to anyway—"I say one, you jab. I say one-one, you
double-jab. I say one-two, left jab, right cross. One-two-three, left
jab, right cross, left hook." After the other pupils went home—with
the occasional one who got a bloody nose packing it in, never to
return—Doc Chizner worked alone with Coleman, some nights
building up his endurance mainly by doing infighting with him,
where you're tugging, you're pulling, you're hitting, and so after-
ward, by comparison, sparring is kid's play. Doc had Coleman up
and out doing his roadwork and his shadowboxing even as the
milkman's horse, drawing the wagon, would arrive in the neighbor-
hood with the morning delivery. Coleman would be out there at
5 A.M. in his gray hooded sweatshirt, in the cold, the snow, it made
no difference, out there three and a half hours before the first
school bell. No one else around, nobody running, long before any-
body knew what running was, doing three quick miles, and throw-
ing punches the whole way, stopping only so as not to frighten that
big, brown, lumbering old beast when, tucked sinisterly within his
monklike cowl, Coleman drew abreast of the milkman and sprinted
ahead. He hated the boredom of the running—and he never missed
a day.

Some four months before Dr. Fensterman came to the house to

make his offer to Coleman's parents, Coleman found himself one
Saturday in Doc Chizner's car being driven up to West Point, where
Doc was going to referee a match between Army and the University
of Pittsburgh. Doc knew the Pitt coach and he wanted the coach to
see Coleman fight. Doc was sure that, what with Coleman's grades,
the coach could get him a four-year scholarship to Pitt, a bigger
scholarship than he could ever get for track, and all he'd have to do
was box for the Pitt team.

Now, it wasn't that on the way up Doc told him to tell the Pitt

coach that he was white. He just told Coleman not to mention that
he was colored.

"If nothing comes up," Doc said, "you don't bring it up. You're

neither one thing or the other. You're Silky Silk. That's enough.

SLIPPING  THE  PUNCH

That's the deal." Doc's favorite expression: that's the deal. Some-
thing else Coleman's father would not allow him to repeat in the
house.
"He won't know?" Coleman asked.

"How? How will he know? How the hell is he going to know?

Here is the top kid from East Orange High, and he is with Doc
Chizner. You know what he's going to think, if he thinks anything?"
"What?"

"You look like you look, you're with me, and so he's going to

think that you're one of Doc's boys. He's going to think that you're
Jewish."

Coleman never regarded Doc as much of a comedian—nothing

like Mac Machrone and his stories about being a Newark cop—but
he laughed loudly at that one and then reminded him, "I'm going
to Howard. I can't go to Pitt. I've got to go to Howard." For as long
as Coleman could remember, his father had been determined to
send him, the brightest of the three kids, to a historically black col-
lege along with the privileged children of the black professional
elite.

"Coleman, box for the guy. That's all. That's the whole deal. Let's

see what happens."

Except for educational trips to New York City with his family,

Coleman had never been out of Jersey before, and so first he spent a
great day walking around West Point pretending he was at West
Point because he was going to go to West Point, and then he boxed
for the Pitt coach against a guy like the guy he'd boxed at the
Knights of Pythias—slow, so slow that within seconds Coleman
realized that there was no way this guy was going to beat him, even
if he was twenty years old and a college boxer. Jesus, Coleman
thought at the end of the first round, if I could fight this guy for the
rest of my life, I'd be better than Ray Robinson. It wasn't just that
Coleman weighed some seven pounds more than when he'd boxed
on the amateur card at the Knights of Pythias. It was that some-
thing he could not even name made him want to be more damag-
ing than he'd ever dared before, to do something more that day

THE  HUMAN  STAIN

than merely win. Was it because the Pitt coach didn't know he was
colored? Could it be because who he really was was entirely his se-
cret? He did love secrets. The secret of nobody's knowing what was
going on in your head, thinking whatever you wanted to think with
no way of anybody's knowing. All the other kids were always blab-
bing about themselves. But that wasn't where the power was or the
pleasure either. The power and pleasure were to be found in the op-
posite, in being counterconfessional in the same way you were a
counterpuncher, and he knew that with nobody having to tell him
and without his having to think about it. That's why he liked shad-
owboxing and hitting the heavy bag: for the secrecy in it. That's why
he liked track, too, but this was even better. Some guys just banged
away at the heavy bag. Not Coleman. Coleman thought, and the
same way that he thought in school or in a race: rule everything else
out, let nothing else in, and immerse yourself in the thing, the sub-
ject, the competition, the exam—whatever's to be mastered, be-
come that thing. He could do that in biology and he could do it in
the dash and he could do it in boxing. And not only did nothing ex-
ternal make any difference, neither did anything internal. If there
were people in the fight crowd shouting at him, he could pay no at-
tention to that, and if the guy he was fighting was his best friend, he
could pay no attention to that. After the fight there was plenty of
time for them to be friends again. He managed to force himself to
ignore his feelings, whether of fear, uncertainty, even friendship—
to have the feelings but have them separately from himself. When
he was shadowboxing, for instance, he wasn't just loosening up. He
was also imagining another guy, in his head fighting through a se-
cret fight with another guy. And in the ring, where the other guy
was real—stinky, snotty, wet, throwing punches as real as could
be—the guy still could have no idea what you were thinking. There
wasn't a teacher to ask for the answer to the question. All the an-
swers that you came up with in the ring, you kept to yourself, and
when you let the secret out, you let it out through everything but
your mouth.

So at magic, mythical West Point, where it looked to him that day

as though there were more of America in every square inch of the
flag flapping on the West Point flagpole than in any flag he'd ever
seen, and where the iron faces of the cadets had for him the most
powerful heroic significance, even here, at the patriotic center, the
marrow of his country's unbreakable spine, where his sixteen-year-
old's fantasy of the place matched perfectly the official fantasy,
where everything he saw made him feel a frenzy of love not only for
himself but for all that was visible, as if everything in nature were a
manifestation of his own life—the sun, the sky, the mountains, the
river, the trees, just Coleman Brutus "Silky" Silk carried to the mil-
lionth degree—even here nobody knew his secret, and so he went
out there in the first round and, unlike Mac Machrone's undefeated
counterpuncher, started hitting this guy with everything he had.
When the guy and he were of the same caliber, he would have to
use his brains, but when the guy was easy and when Coleman saw
that early, he could always be a more aggressive fighter and begin
to pound away. And that's what happened at West Point. Before
you turned around, he had cut the guy's eyes, the guy's nose was
bleeding, and he was knocking him all over the place. And then
something happened that had never happened before. He threw a
hook, one that seemed to go three-quarters of the way into the
guy's body. It went so deep he was astonished, though not half
as astonished as the Pitt guy. Coleman weighed a hundred and
twenty-eight pounds, hardly a young boxer who knocked people
out. He never really planted his feet to throw that one good shot,
that was not his style; and still this punch to the body went so deep
that the guy just folded forward, a college boxer already twenty
years old, and Coleman caught him in what Doc Chizner called
"the labonz." Right in the labonz, and the guy folded forward, and
for a moment Coleman thought the guy was even going to throw
up, and so before he threw up and before he went down, Coleman
set himself to whack him with the right one more time—all he saw
as this white guy was going down was somebody he wanted to beat

the living shit out of—but suddenly the Pitt coach, who was the ref-
eree, called, "Don't, Silky!" and as Coleman started to throw that
last right, the coach grabbed him and stopped the fight.

"And that kid," said Doc on the drive home, "that kid was a god-

damn good fighter, too. But when they dragged him back to his
corner, they had to tell him the fight was over. This kid is already
back in his corner, and still he didn't know what hit him."

Deep in the victory, in the magic, in the ecstasy of that last punch

and of the sweet flood of fury that had broken out and into the
open and overtaken him no less than its victim, Coleman said—al-
most as though he were speaking in his sleep rather than aloud in
the car as he replayed the fight in his head—"I guess I was too quick
for him, Doc."

"Sure, quick. Of course quick. I know you're quick. But also

strong. That is the best hook you ever threw, Silky. My boy, you
were too strong for him."
Was he? Truly strong?

He went to Howard anyway. Had he not, his father would—with
words alone, with just the English language—have killed him. Mr.
Silk had it all figured out: Coleman was going to Howard to become
a doctor, to meet a light-skinned girl there from a good Negro fam-
ily, to marry and settle down and have children who would in turn
go to Howard. At all-Negro Howard, Coleman's tremendous ad-
vantages of intellect and of appearance would launch him into the
topmost ranks of Negro society, make of him someone people
would forever look up to. And yet within his first week at Howard,
when he eagerly went off on Saturday with his roommate, a law-
yer's son from New Brunswick, to see the Washington Monument,
and they stopped in Woolworth's to get a hot dog, he was called a
nigger. His first time. And they wouldn't give him the hot dog. Re-
fused a hot dog at Woolworth's in downtown Washington, on the
way out called a nigger, and, as a result, unable to divorce himself
from his feelings as easily as he did in the ring. At East Orange High
the class valedictorian, in the segregated South just another nigger.

In the segregated South there were no separate identities, not even
for him and his roommate. No such subtleties allowed, and the im-
pact was devastating. Nigger—and it meant him.

Of course, even in East Orange he had not escaped the mini-

mally less malevolent forms of exclusion that socially separated his
family and the small colored community from the rest of East Or-
ange—everything that flowed from what his father called the coun-
try's "Negrophobia." And he knew, too, that working for the Penn-
sylvania Railroad, his father had to put up with insults in the dining
car and, union or no union, prejudicial treatment from the com-
pany that were far more humbling than anything Coleman would
have known as an East Orange kid who was not only as light-
skinned as a Negro could get but a bubbling, enthusiastic, quick-
witted boy who happened also to be a star athlete and a straight-A
student. He would watch his father do everything he could so as
not to explode when he came home from work after something had
happened on the job about which, if he wanted to keep the job, he
could do nothing but meekly say, "Yes, suh." That Negroes who
were lighter were treated better didn't always hold true. "Any time a
white deals with you," his father would tell the family, "no matter
how well intentioned he may be, there is the presumption of intel-
lectual inferiority. Somehow or other, if not directly by his words
then by his facial expression, by his tone of voice, by his impatience,
even by the opposite—by his forbearance, by his wonderful display
of humaneness—he will always talk to you as though you are dumb,
and then, if you're not, he will be astonished." "What happened,
Dad?" Coleman would ask. But, as much out of pride as disgust,
rarely would his father elucidate. To make the pedagogical point
was enough. "What happened," Coleman's mother would explain,
"is beneath your father even to repeat."

At East Orange High, there were teachers from whom Coleman

sensed an unevenness of acceptance, an unevenness of endorse-
ment compared to what they lavished on the smart white kids, but
never to the degree that the unevenness was able to block his aims.
No matter what the slight or the obstacle, he took it the way he

took the low hurdles. If only to feign impregnability, he shrugged
things off that Walter, say, could not and would not. Walt played
varsity football, got good grades, as a Negro was no less anomalous
in his skin color than Coleman, and yet he was always a little an-
grier about everything. When, for instance, he didn't get invited
into a white kid's house but was made to wait outside, when he
wasn't asked to the birthday party of a white teammate whom he'd
been foolish enough to consider a buddy, Coleman, who shared a
bedroom with him, would hear about it for months. When Walt
didn't get his A in trigonometry, he went right to the teacher and
stood there and, to the man's white face, said, "I think you made a
mistake." When the teacher went over his grade book and looked
again at Walt's test scores, he came back to Walt and, even while
allowing his mistake, had the nerve to say, "I couldn't believe your
grades were as high as they were," and only after a remark like
that made the change from a B to an A. Coleman wouldn't have
dreamed of asking a teacher to change a grade, but then he'd never
had to. Maybe because he didn't have Walt's brand of bristling
defiance, or maybe because he was lucky, or maybe because he was
smarter and excelling academically wasn't the same effort for him
that it was for Walt, he got the A in the first place. And when, in the
seventh grade, he didn't get invited to some white friend's birthday
party (and this was somebody who lived just down the block in the
corner apartment house, the little white son of the building's super
who'd been walking back and forth to school with Coleman since
they'd started kindergarten), Coleman didn't take it as rejection by
white people—after his initial mystification, he took it as rejection
by Dicky Watkin's stupid mother and father. When he taught Doc
Chizner's class, he knew there were kids who were repelled by him,
who didn't like to be touched by him or to come in contact with his
sweat, there was occasionally a kid who dropped out—again, prob-
ably because of parents who didn't want him taking boxing instruc-
tion, or any instruction, from a colored boy—and yet, unlike Walt,
on whom no slight failed to register, Coleman, in the end, could
forget it, dismiss it, or decide to appear to. There was the time one

SLIPPING  THE   PUNCH

of the white runners on the track team was injured seriously in a
car crash and guys from the team rushed to offer blood to the fam-
ily for the transfusions, and Coleman was one of them, yet his was
the blood the family didn't take. They thanked him and told him
that they had enough, but he knew what the real reason was. No, it
wasn't that he didn't know what was going on. He was too smart
not to know. He competed against plenty of white Newark guys at
track meets, Italians from Barringer, Poles from East Side, Irish
from Central, Jews from Weequahic. He saw, he heard—he over-
heard. Coleman knew what was going on. But he also knew what
wasn't going on, at the center of his life anyway. The protection of
his parents, the protection provided by Walt as his older, six-foot-
two-and-a-half-inch brother, his own innate confidence, his bright
charm, his running prowess ("the fastest kid in the Oranges"), even
his color, which made of him someone that people sometimes
couldn't quite figure out—all this combined to mute for Coleman
the insults that Walter found intolerable. Then there was the differ-
ence of personality: Walt was Walt, vigorously Walt, and Coleman
was vigorously not. There was probably no better explanation than
that for their different responses.

But "nigger"—directed at him? That infuriated him. And yet,

unless he wanted to get in serious trouble, there was nothing he
could do about it except to keep walking out of the store. This
wasn't the amateur boxing card at the Knights of Pythias. This was
Woolworth's in Washington, D.C. His fists were useless, his foot-
work was useless, so was his rage. Forget Walter. How could his fa-
ther have taken this shit? In one form or another taken shit like this
in that dining car every single day! Never before, for all his pre-
cocious cleverness, had Coleman realized how protected his life
had been, nor had he gauged his father's fortitude or realized the
powerful force that man was—powerful not merely by virtue of be-
ing his father. At last he saw all that his father had been condemned
to accept. He saw all his father's defenselessness, too, where be-
fore he had been a naive enough youngster to imagine, from the
lordly, austere, sometimes insufferable way Mr. Silk conducted

himself, that there was nothing vulnerable there. But because
somebody, belatedly, had got around to calling Coleman a nigger to
his face, he finally recognized the enormous barrier against the
great American menace that his father had been for him.

But that didn't make life better at Howard. Especially when he

began to think that there was something of the nigger about him
even to the kids in his dorm who had all sorts of new clothes and
money in their pockets and in the summertime didn't hang around
the hot streets at home but went to "camp"—and not Boy Scout
camp out in the Jersey sticks but fancy places where they rode
horses and played tennis and acted in plays. What the hell was a
"cotillion"? Where was Highland Beach? What were these kids talk-
ing about? He was among the very lightest of the light-skinned in
the freshman class, lighter even than his tea-colored roommate, but
he could have been the blackest, most benighted field hand for all
they knew that he didn't. He hated Howard from the day he arrived,
within the week hated Washington, and so in early October, when
his father dropped dead serving dinner on the Pennsylvania Rail-
road dining car that was pulling out of 30th Street Station in Phila-
delphia for Wilmington, and Coleman went home for the funeral,
he told his mother he was finished with that college. She pleaded
with him to give it a second chance, assured him that there had to
be boys from something like his own modest background, scholar-
ship boys like him, to mix with and befriend, but nothing his
mother said, however true, could change his mind. Only two peo-
ple were able to get Coleman to change his mind once he'd made it
up, his father and Walt, and even they had to all but break his will to
do it. But Walt was in Italy with the U.S. Army, and the father
whom Coleman had to placate by doing as he was told was no lon-
ger around to sonorously dictate anything.

Of course he wept at the funeral and knew how colossal this

thing was that, without warning, had been taken away. When the
minister read, along with the biblical stuff, a selection from Julius
Caesar out of his father's cherished volume of Shakespeare's plays
—the oversized book with the floppy leather binding that, when

Coleman was a small boy, always reminded him of a cocker span-
iel—the son felt his father's majesty as never before: the grandeur
of both his rise and his fall, the grandeur that, as a college freshman
away for barely a month from the tiny enclosure of his East Orange
home, Coleman had begun faintly to discern for what it was.

Cowards die many times before their deaths;
The valiant never taste of death but once.
Of all the wonders that I yet have heard,
It seems to me most strange that men should fear;
Seeing that death, a necessary end,
Will come when it will come.

The word "valiant," as the preacher intoned it, stripped away Cole-
man's manly effort at sober, stoical self-control and laid bare a
child's longing for that man closest to him that he'd never see again,
the mammoth, secretly suffering father who talked so easily, so
sweepingly, who with just his powers of speech had inadvertently
taught Coleman to want to be stupendous. Coleman wept with the
most fundamental and copious of all emotions, reduced helplessly
to everything he could not bear. As an adolescent complaining
about his father to his friends, he would characterize him with far
more scorn than he felt or had the capacity to feel—pretending to
an impersonal way of judging his own father was one more method
he'd devised to invent and claim impregnability. But to be no lon-
ger circumscribed and defined by his father was like finding that all
the clocks wherever he looked had stopped, and all the watches, and
that there was no way of knowing what time it was. Down to the
day he arrived in Washington and entered Howard, it was, like it or
not, his father who had been making up Coleman's story for him;
now he would have to make it up himself, and the prospect was ter-
rifying. And then it wasn't. Three terrible, terrifying days passed, a
terrible week, two terrible weeks, until, out of nowhere, it was exhil-
arating.
"What can be avoided / Whose end is purposed by the mighty

gods?" Lines also from Julius Caesar, quoted to him by his father,
and yet only with his father in the grave did Coleman at last bother
to hear them—and when he did, instantaneously to aggrandize
them. This had been purposed by the mighty gods! Silky's freedom.
The raw I. All the subtlety of being Silky Silk.

At Howard he'd discovered that he wasn't just a nigger to Wash-

ington, D.C.—as if that shock weren't strong enough, he discovered
at Howard that he was a Negro as well. A Howard Negro at that.
Overnight the raw I was part of a we with all of the we's overbear-
ing solidity, and he didn't want anything to do with it or with the
next oppressive we that came along either. You finally leave home,
the Ur of we, and you find another we? Another place that's just like
that, the substitute for that? Growing up in East Orange, he was of
course a Negro, very much of their small community of five thou-
sand or so, but boxing, running, studying, at everything he did con-
centrating and succeeding, roaming around on his own all over the
Oranges and, with or without Doc Chizner, down across the New-
ark line, he was, without thinking about it, everything else as well.
He was Coleman, the greatest of the great pioneers of the I.

Then he went off to Washington and, in the first month, he was a

nigger and nothing else and he was a Negro and nothing else. No.
No. He saw the fate awaiting him, and he wasn't having it. Grasped
it intuitively and recoiled spontaneously. You can't let the big they
impose its bigotry on you any more than you can let the little they
become a we and impose its ethics on you. Not the tyranny of the
we and its we-talk and everything that the we wants to pile on your
head. Never for him the tyranny of the we that is dying to suck you
in, the coercive, inclusive, historical, inescapable moral we with its
insidious E pluribus unum. Neither the they of Woolworth's nor the
we of Howard. Instead the raw I with all its agility. Self-discovery—
that was the punch to the labonz. Singularity. The passionate strug-
gle for singularity. The singular animal. The sliding relationship
with everything. Not static but sliding. Self-knowledge but con-
cealed. What is as powerful as that?
"Beware the ides of March." Bullshit—beware nothing. Free.

With both bulwarks gone—the big brother overseas and the father
dead—he is repowered and free to be whatever he wants, free to
pursue the hugest aim, the confidence right in his bones to be his
particular I. Free on a scale unimaginable to his father. As free as his
father had been unfree. Free now not only of his father but of all
that his father had ever had to endure. The impositions. The humil-
iations. The obstructions. The wound and the pain and the postur-
ing and the shame—all the inward agonies of failure and defeat.
Free instead on the big stage. Free to go ahead and be stupendous.
Free to enact the boundless, self-defining drama of the pronouns
we, they, and I.

The war was still on, and unless it ended overnight he was go-

ing to be drafted anyway. If Walt was in Italy fighting Hitler, why
shouldn't he fight the bastard too? It was October of 1944, and
he was still a month shy of being eighteen. But he could easily lie
about his age—to move his birth date back by a month, from
November 12 to October 12, was no problem at all. And dealing
as he was with his mother's grief—and with her shock at his quit-
ting college—it didn't immediately occur to him that, if he chose
to, he could lie about his race as well. He could play his skin how-
ever he wanted, color himself just as he chose. No, that did not
dawn on him until he was seated in the federal building in New-
ark and had all the navy enlistment forms spread out in front of
him and, before filling them out, and carefully, with the same me-
ticulous scrutiny that he'd studied for his high school exams—
as though whatever he was doing, large or small, was, for how-
ever long he concentrated on it, the most important thing in the
world—began to read them through. And even then it didn't occur
to him. It occurred first to his heart, which began banging away
like the heart of someone on the brink of committing his first
great crime.

In '46, when Coleman came out of the service, Ernestine was al-
ready enrolled in the elementary education program at Montclair
State Teachers College, Walt was at Montclair State finishing up,

and both of them were living at home with their widowed mother.
But Coleman, determined to live by himself, on his own, was across
the river in New York, enrolled at NYU. He wanted to live in Green-
wich Village far more than to go to NYU, wanted to be a poet or a
playwright far more than to study for a degree, but the best way he
could think to pursue his goals without having to get a job to sup-
port himself was by cashing in on the GI Bill. The problem was that
as soon as he started taking classes, he wound up getting A's, getting
interested, and by the end of his first two years he was on the track
for Phi Beta Kappa and a summa cum laude degree in classics. His
quick mind and prodigious memory and classroom fluency made
his performance at school as outstanding as it had always been,
with the result that what he had come to New York wanting most
was displaced by his success at what everybody else thought he
should do and encouraged him to do and admired him for doing
brilliantly. This was beginning to look like a pattern: he kept getting
co-opted because of his academic prowess. Sure, he could take it all
in and even enjoy it, the pleasure of being conventional unconven-
tionally, but that wasn't really the idea. He had been a whiz at Latin
and Greek in high school and gotten the Howard scholarship when
what he wanted was to box in the Golden Gloves; now he was no
less a whiz in college, while his poetry, when he showed it to his
professors, didn't kindle any enthusiasm. At first he kept up his
roadwork and his boxing for the fun of it, until one day at the gym
he was approached to fight a four-rounder at St. Nick's Arena, of-
fered thirty-five dollars to take the place of a fighter who'd pulled
out, and mostly to make up for all he'd missed at the Golden
Gloves, he accepted and, to his delight, secretly turned pro.

girls, girls who knew how to walk and how to wear a dress, how to
move in a dress, girls who conformed to everything he'd been imag-
ining when he'd set out from the separation center in San Francisco
for New York—girls who put the streets of Greenwich Village and
the crisscrossing walkways of Washington Square to their proper

SLIPPING  THE  PUNCH

use. There were warm spring afternoons when nothing in trium-
phant postwar America, let alone in the world of antiquity, could
be of more interest to Coleman than the legs of the girl walking in
front of him. Nor was he the only one back from the war beset by
this fixation. In those days in Greenwich Village there seemed to
be no more engrossing off-hours entertainment for NYU's ex-GIs
than appraising the legs of the women who passed by the coffee-
houses and cafes where they congregated to read the papers and
play chess. Who knows why sociologically, but whatever the reason,
it was the great American era of aphrodisiacal legs, and once or
twice a day at least, Coleman followed a pair of them for block after
block so as not to lose sight of the way they moved and how they
were shaped and what they looked like at rest while the corner light
was changing from red to green. And when he gauged the moment
was right—having followed behind long enough to become both
verbally poised and insanely ravenous—and quickened his pace so
as to catch up, when he spoke and ingratiated himself enough so as
to be allowed to fall in step beside her and to ask her name and to
make her laugh and to get her to accept a date, he was, whether she
knew it or not, proposing the date to her legs.

And the girls, in turn, liked Coleman's legs. Steena Palsson, the

eighteen-year-old exile from Minnesota, even wrote a poem about
Coleman that mentioned his legs. It was handwritten on a sheet of
lined notebook paper, signed "S," then folded in quarters and stuck
into his mail slot in the tiled hallway above his basement room. It
had been two weeks since they'd first flirted at the subway station,
and this was the Monday after the Sunday of their first twenty-
four-hour marathon. Coleman had rushed off to his morning class
while Steena was still making up in the bathroom; a few minutes
later, she herself set out for work, but not before leaving him the
poem that, in spite of all the stamina they'd so conscientiously
demonstrated over the previous day, she'd been too shy to hand
him directly. Since Coleman's schedule took him from his classes to
the library to his late evening workout in the ring of a rundown

THE  HUMAN  STAIN

Chinatown gym, he didn't find the poem jutting from the mail slot
until he got back to Sullivan Street at eleven-thirty that night.

He has a body.
He has a beautiful body—
the muscles on the backs of his legs and the back of his neck.

Also he is bright and brash.
He's four years older,
but sometimes I feel he is younger.

He is sweet, still, and romantic, though he says he is not romantic.

I am almost dangerous for this man.

How much can I tell of what I see in him? I wonder what he does after
he swallows me whole.

Rapidly reading Steena's handwriting by the dim hall light, he at

first mistook "neck" for "negro"—and the back of his negro... His
negro what? Till then he'd been surprised by how easy it was. What
was supposed to be hard and somehow shaming or destructive was
not only easy but without consequences, no price paid at all. But
now the sweat was pouring off him. He kept reading, faster even
than before, but the words formed themselves into no combination
that made sense. His negro WHAT? They had been naked together
a whole day and night, for most of that time never more than
inches apart. Not since he was an infant had anyone other than
himself had so much time to study how he was made. Since there
was nothing about her long pale body that he had not observed and
nothing that she had concealed and nothing now that he could not
picture with a painterlike awareness, a lover's excited, meticulous
connoisseurship, and since he had spent all day stimulated no less
by her presence in his nostrils than by her legs spread-eagled in
his mind's eye, it had to follow that there was nothing about his

body that she had not microscopically absorbed, nothing about
that extensive surface imprinted with his self-cherishing evolution-
ary uniqueness, nothing about his singular configuration as a man,
his skin, his pores, his whiskers, his teeth, his hands, his nose, his
ears, his lips, his tongue, his feet, his balls, his veins, his prick, his
armpits, his ass, his tangle of pubic hair, the hair on his head,
the fuzz on his frame, nothing about the way he laughed, slept,
breathed, moved, smelled, nothing about the way he shuddered
convulsively when he came that she had not registered. And re-
membered. And pondered.

Was it the act itself that did it, the absolute intimacy of it, when

you are not just inside the body of the other person but she is
tightly enveloping you? Or was it the physical nakedness? You take
off your clothes and you're in bed with somebody, and that is in-
deed where whatever you've concealed, your particularity, whatever
it may be, however encrypted, is going to be found out, and that's
what the shyness is all about and what everybody fears. In that anar-
chic crazy place, how much of me is being seen, how much of me is
being discovered? Now I know who you are. I see dear through to the
back of your negro.

But how, by seeing what? What could it have been? Was it seeable

to her, whatever it was, because she was a blond Icelandic Dane
from a long line of blond Icelanders and Danes, Scandinavian-
raised, at home, in school, at church, in the company all her life of
nothing but . . . and then Coleman recognized the word in the
poem as a four- and not a five-letter word. What she'd written
wasn't "negro." It was "neck." Oh, my neck! It's only my neck!.. .the
muscles on the backs of his legs and the back of his neck.

But what then did this mean: "How much can I tell / of what I

see in him?" What was so ambiguous about what she saw in him? If
she'd written "tell from" instead of "tell of," would that have made
her meaning clearer? Or would that have made it less clear? The
more he reread that simple stanza, the more opaque the meaning
became—and the more opaque the meaning, the more certain he
was that she distinctly sensed the problem that Coleman brought to

her life. Unless she meant by "what I see in him" no more than what
is colloquially meant by skeptical people when they ask someone in
love, "What can you possibly see in him?"

And what about "tell"? How much can she tell to whom? By tell

does she mean make—"how much can I make," et cetera—or does
she mean reveal, expose? And what about "I am almost dangerous
for this man." Is "dangerous for" different from "dangerous to"? Ei-
ther way, what's the danger?

Each time he tried to penetrate her meaning, it slipped away. Af-

ter two frantic minutes on his feet in the hallway, all he could be
sure of was his fear. And this astonished him—and, as always with
Coleman, his susceptibility, by catching him unprepared, shamed
him as well, triggering an SOS, a ringing signal to self-vigilance to
take up the slack.

Bright and game and beautiful as Steena was, she was only eigh-

teen years old and fresh to New York from Fergus Falls, Minnesota,
and yet he was now more intimidated by her—and her almost pre-
posterous, unequivocal goldenness—than by anybody he had ever
faced in the ring. Even on that night in the Norfolk whorehouse,
when the woman who was watching from the bed as he began to
peel off his uniform—a big-titted, fleshy, mistrustful whore not en-
tirely ugly but certainly no looker (and maybe herself two thirty-
fifths something other than white)—smiled sourly and said,
"You're a black nigger, ain't you, boy?" and the two goons were
summoned to throw him out, only then had he been as undone as
he was by Steena's poem.

I wonder what he does after he swallows me whole.

Even that he could not understand. At the desk in his room, he

battled into the morning with the paradoxical implications of this
final stanza, ferreting out and then renouncing one complicated
formulation after another until, at daybreak, all he knew for sure
was that for Steena, ravishing Steena, not everything he had eradi-
cated from himself had vanished into thin air.

SLIPPING   THE   PUNCH

Dead wrong. Her poem didn't mean anything. It wasn't even a

poem. Under the pressure of her own confusion, fragments of
ideas, raw bits of thought, had all chaotically come tumbling into
her head while she was under the shower, and so she'd torn a page
from one of his notebooks, scribbled out at his desk whatever
words jelled, then jammed the page into the mail slot before rush-
ing off for work. Those lines were just something she'd done—that
she'd had to do—with the exquisite newness of her bewilderment.
A poet? Hardly, she laughed: just somebody leaping through a ring
of fire.

They were together in the bed in his room every weekend for

over a year, feeding on each other like prisoners in solitary madly
downing their daily ration of bread and water. She astonished
him—astonished herself—with the dance she did one Saturday
night, standing at the foot of his foldout sofa bed in her half slip
and nothing else. She was getting undressed, and the radio was
on—Symphony Sid—and first, to get her moving and in the mood,
there was Count Basic and a bunch of jazz musicians jamming on
"Lady Be Good," a wild live recording, and following that, more
Gershwin, the Artie Shaw rendition of "The Man I Love" that fea-
tured Roy Eldridge steaming everything up. Coleman was lying
semi-upright on the bed, doing what he most loved to do on a
Saturday night after they'd returned from their five bucks' worth
of Chianti and spaghetti and cannoli in their favorite Fourteenth
Street basement restaurant: watch her take her clothes off. All at
once, with no prompting from him—seemingly prompted only by
Eldridge's trumpet—she began what Coleman liked to describe as
the single most slithery dance ever performed by a Fergus Falls girl
after little more than a year in New York City. She could have raised
Gershwin himself from the grave with that dance, and with the way
she sang the song. Prompted by a colored trumpet player playing it
like a black torch song, there to see, plain as day, was all the power
of her whiteness. That big white thing. "Some day he'll come along
... the man I love ... and he'll be big and strong... the man I love."
The language was ordinary enough to have been lifted from the

THE   HUMAN   STAIN

most innocent first-grade primer, but when the record was over,
Steena put her hands up to hide her face, half meaning, half pre-
tending to cover her shame. But the gesture protected her against
nothing, least of all from his enravishment. The gesture merely
transported him further. "Where did I find you, Voluptas?" he
asked. "How did I find you? Who are you?"

It was during this, the headiest of times that Coleman gave up his

evening workout at the Chinatown gym and cut back his early
morning five-mile run and, in the end, relinquished in any way tak-
ing seriously his having turned pro. He had fought and won a total
of four professional bouts, three four-rounders and then, his finale,
a six-rounder, all of them Monday night fights at the old St. Nicho-
las Arena. He never told Steena about the fights, never told anyone
at NYU, and certainly never let on to his family. For those first few
years of college, that was one more secret, even though at the arena
he boxed under the name of Silky Silk and the results from St.
Nick's were printed in small type in a box on the sports page of the
tabloids the next day. From the first second of the first round of the
first thirty-five-dollar four-round fight, he went into the ring as a
pro with an attitude different from that of his amateur days. Not
that he had ever wanted to lose as an amateur. But as a pro he put
out twice as hard, if only to prove to himself that he could stay there
if he wanted to. None of the fights went the distance, and in the last
fight, the six-rounder—with Beau Jack at the top of the card—and
for which he got one hundred dollars, he stopped the guy in two
minutes and some-odd seconds and was not even tired when it was
over. Walking down the aisle for the six-rounder, Coleman had had
to pass the ringside seat of Solly Tabak, the promoter, who was al-
ready dangling a contract in front of Coleman to sign away a third
of his earnings for the next ten years. Solly slapped him on the
behind and, in his meaty whisper, told him, "Feel the nigger out in
the first round, see what he's got, Silky, and give the people their
money's worth." Coleman nodded at Tabak and smiled but, while
climbing into the ring, thought, Fuck you. I'm getting a hundred
dollars, and I'm going to let some guy hit me to give the people

SLIPPING  THE  PUNCH

their money's worth? I'm supposed to give a shit about some jerk-
off sitting in the fifteenth row? I'm a hundred and thirty-nine
pounds and five foot eight and a half, he's a hundred and forty-five
and five foot ten, and I'm supposed to let the guy hit me in the head
four, five, ten extra times in order to put on a show? Fuck the show.

After the fight Solly was not happy with Coleman's behavior. It

struck him as juvenile. "You could have stopped the nigger in the
fourth round instead of the first and gave the people their money's
worth. But you didn't. I ask you nicely, and you don't do what I ask
you. Why's that, wise guy?"

"Because I don't carry no nigger." That's what he said, the classics

major from NYU and valedictorian son of the late optician, dining
car waiter, amateur linguist, grammarian, disciplinarian, and stu-
dent of Shakespeare Clarence Silk. That's how obstinate he was,
that's how secretive he was—no matter what he undertook, that's
how much he meant business, this colored kid from East Orange
High.

He stopped fighting because of Steena. However mistaken he was

about the ominous meaning hidden in her poem, he remained con-
vinced that the mysterious forces that made their sexual ardor inex-
haustible—that transformed them into lovers so unbridled that
Steena, in a neophyte's distillation of self-marveling self-mockery,
midwesternly labeled them "two mental cases"—would one day
work to dissolve his story of himself right before her eyes. How this
would happen he did not know, and how he could forestall it he did
not know. But the boxing wasn't going to help. Once she found out
about Silky Silk, questions would be raised that would inevitably
lead her to stumble on the truth. She knew that he had a mother in
East Orange who was a registered nurse and a regular churchgoer,
that he had an older brother who'd begun teaching seventh and
eighth grades in Asbury Park and a sister finishing up for her teach-
ing certificate from Montclair State, and that once each month the
Sunday in his Sullivan Street bed had to be cut short because
Coleman was expected in East Orange for dinner. She knew that his
father had been an optician—just that, an optician—and even that

he'd come originally from Georgia. Coleman was scrupulous in
seeing that she had no reason to doubt the truth of whatever she
was told by him, and once he'd given up the boxing for good, he
didn't even have to lie about that. He didn't lie to Steena about any-
thing. All he did was to follow the instructions that Doc Chizner
had given him the day they were driving up to West Point (and that
already had gotten him through the navy): if nothing comes up,
you don't bring it up.

His decision to invite her to East Orange for Sunday dinner, like

all his other decisions now—even the decision at St. Nick's to si-
lently say fuck you to Solly Tabak by taking out the other guy in
the first round—was based on nobody's thinking but his own. It
was close to two years since they'd met, Steena was twenty and he
was twenty-four, and he could no longer envision himself walking
down Eighth Street, let alone proceeding through life, without her.
Her undriven, conventional daily demeanor in combination with
the intensity of her weekend abandon—all of it subsumed by a
physical incandescence, a girlish American flashbulb radiance that
was practically voodooish in its power—had achieved a startling
supremacy over a will as ruthlessly independent as Coleman's: she
had not only severed him from boxing and the combative filial
defiance encapsulated in being Silky Silk the undefeated welter-
weight pro, but had freed him from the desire for anyone else.

Yet he couldn't tell her he was colored. The words he heard him-

self having to speak were going to make everything sound worse
than it was—make him sound worse than he was. And if he then
left it to her to imagine his family, she was going to picture people
wholly unlike what they were. Because she knew no Negroes, she
would imagine the kind of Negroes she saw in the movies or knew
from the radio or heard about in jokes. He realized by now that she
was not prejudiced and that if only she were to meet Ernestine and
Walt and his mother, she would recognize right off how conven-
tional they were and how much they happened to have in common
with the tiresome respectability she had herself been all too glad to
leave behind in Fergus Falls. "Don't get me wrong—it's a lovely

city," she hastened to tell him, "it's a beautiful city. It's unusual,
Fergus Falls, because it has the Otter Tail Lake just to the east, and
not far from our house it has the Otter Tail River. And it's, I sup-
pose, a little more sophisticated than other towns out there that
size, because it's just south and to the east of Fargo-Moorhead,
which is the college town in that section of the country." Her father
owned a hardware supply store and a small lumberyard. "An irre-
pressible, gigantic, amazing person, my father. Huge. Like a slab of
ham. He drinks in one night an entire container of whatever alco-
hol you have around. I could never believe it. I still can't. He just
keeps going. He gets a big gash in his calf muscle wrestling with a
piece of machinery—he just leaves it there, he doesn't wash it. They
tend to be like this, the Icelanders. Bulldozer types. What's interest-
ing is his personality. Most astonishing person. My father in a con-
versation takes over the whole room. And he's not the only one. My
Palsson grandparents, too. His father is that way. His mother is that
way." "Icelanders. I didn't even know you call them Icelanders. I
didn't even know they were here. I don't know anything about Ice-
landers at all. When," Coleman asked, "did they come to Minne-
sota?" She shrugged and laughed. "Good question. I'm going to say
after the dinosaurs. That's what it seems like." "And it's him you're
escaping?" "I guess. Hard to be the daughter of that sort of feisti-
ness. He kind of submerges you." "And your mother? He submerges
her?" "That's the Danish side of the family. That's the Rasmussens.
No, she's unsubmergeable. My mother's too practical to be sub-
merged. The characteristics of her family—and I don't think it's pe-
culiar to that family, I think Danes are this way, and they're not too
different from Norwegians in this way either—they're interested
in objects. Objects. Tablecloths. Dishes. Vases. They talk endlessly
about how much each object costs. My mother's father is like this
too, my grandfather Rasmussen. Her whole family. They don't have
any dreams in them. They don't have any unreality. Everything is
made up of objects and what they cost and how much you can get
them for. She goes into people's houses and examines all the objects
and knows where they got half of them and tells them where they

THE   HUMAN   STAIN

could have got them for less. And clothing. Each object of clothing.
Same thing. Practicality. A bare-boned practicality about the whole
bunch of them. Thrifty. Extremely thrifty. Clean. Extremely clean.
She'll notice, when I come home from school, if I have one bit of
ink under one fingernail from filling a fountain pen. When she's
having guests on a Saturday evening, she sets the table Friday night
at about five o'clock. It's there, every glass, every piece of silver. And
then she throws a light gossamer thing over it so it won't get dust
specks on it. Everything organized perfectly. And a fantastically
good cook if you don't like any spices or salt or pepper. Or taste of
any kind. So that's my parents. I can't get to the bottom with her
particularly. On anything. It's all surface. She's organizing every-
thing and my father's disorganizing everything, and so I got to be
eighteen and graduated high school and came here. Since if I'd
gone up to Moorhead or North Dakota State, I'd still have to be liv-
ing at home, I said the heck with college and came to New York.
And so here I am. Steena."

That's how she explained who she was and where she came from

and why she'd left. For him it was not going to be so simple. After-
ward, he told himself. Afterward—that's when he could make his
explanations and ask her to understand how he could not allow his
prospects to be unjustly limited by so arbitrary a designation as
race. If she was calm enough to hear him out, he was sure he could
make her see why he had chosen to take the future into his own
hands rather than to leave it to an unenlightened society to deter-
mine his fate—a society in which, more than eighty years after the
Emancipation Proclamation, bigots happened to play too large a
role to suit him. He would get her to see that far from there being
anything wrong with his decision to identify himself as white, it
was the most natural thing for someone with his outlook and tem-
perament and skin color to have done. All he'd ever wanted, from
earliest childhood on, was to be free: not black, not even white—
just on his own and free. He meant to insult no one by his choice,
nor was he trying to imitate anyone whom he took to be his supe-
rior, nor was he staging some sort of protest against his race or hers.

SLIPPING   THE   PUNCH

He recognized that to conventional people for whom everything
was ready-made and rigidly unalterable what he was doing would
never look correct. But to dare to be nothing more than correct had
never been his aim. The objective was for his fate to be determined
not by the ignorant, hate-filled intentions of a hostile world but, to
whatever degree humanly possible, by his own resolve. Why accept
a life on any other terms?

This is what he would tell her. And wouldn't it all strike her as

nonsense, like one big sales pitch of a pretentious lie? Unless she
had first met his family—confronted head-on the fact that he was
as much a Negro as they were, and that they were as unlike what she
might imagine Negroes to be as he was—these words or any others
would seem to her only another form of concealment. Until she sat
down to dinner with Ernestine, Walt, and his mother, and they all
took a turn over the course of a day at swapping reassuring banali-
ties, whatever explanation he presented to her would sound like so
much preening, self-glorifying, self-justifying baloney, high-flown,
highfalutin talk whose falseness would shame him in her eyes no
less than in his own. No, he couldn't speak this shit either. It was be-
neath him. If he wanted this girl for good, then it was boldness that
was required now and not an elocutionary snow job, a la Clarence
Silk.

In the week before the visit, though he didn't prepare anyone

else, he readied himself in the same concentrated way he used to
prepare mentally for a fight, and when they stepped off the train at
the Brick Church Station that Sunday, he even summoned up the
phrases that he always chanted semi-mystically in the seconds be-
fore the bell sounded: "The task, nothing but the task. At one with
the task. Nothing else allowed in." Only then, at the bell, breaking
from his corner—or here, starting up the porch stairs to the front
door—did he add the ordinary Joe's call to arms: "Go to work."

The Silks had been in their one-family house since 1925, the year

before Coleman was born. When they got there, the rest of the
street was white, and the small frame house was sold to them by a
couple who were mad at the people next door and so were deter-

THE HUMAN STAIN

mined to sell it to colored to spite them. But no one in the private
houses ran because they'd moved in, and even if the Silks never
socialized with their neighbors, everyone was agreeable on that
stretch of street leading up toward the Episcopal rectory and
church. Agreeable even though the rector, when he arrived some
years earlier, had looked around, seen a fair number of Bahamians
and Barbadians, who were Church of England—many of them do-
mestics working for East Orange's white rich, many of them island
people who knew their place and sat at the back and thought they
were accepted—leaned on his pulpit, and, before beginning the ser-
mon on his first Sunday, said, "I see we have some colored families
here. We'll have to do something about that." After consulting with
the seminary in New York, he had seen to it that various services
and Sunday schools for the colored were conducted, outside basic
church law, in the colored families' houses. Later, the swimming
pool at the high school was shut down by the school superinten-
dent so that the white kids wouldn't have to swim with the colored
kids. A big swimming pool, used for swimming classes and a swim-
ming team, a part of the physical education program for years, but
since there were objections from some of the white kids' parents
who were employers of the black kids' parents—the ones working
as maids and housemen and chauffeurs and gardeners and yard-
men—the pool was drained and covered over.

Within the four square miles of this residential flyspeck of a Jer-

sey town of not quite seventy thousand people, as throughout the
country during Coleman's youth, there existed these rigid distinc-
tions between classes and races sanctified by the church and legiti-
mized by the schools. Yet on the Silks' own modest tree-lined side
street ordinary people needed not to be quite so responsible to God
and the state as those whose vocation it was to maintain a human
community, swimming pool and all, untainted by the impurities,
and so the neighbors were on the whole friendly with the ultra-
respectable, light-skinned Silks—Negroes, to be sure, but, in the
words of one tolerant mother of a kindergarten playmate of Cole-
man's, "people of a very pleasing shade, rather like eggnog"—even

SLIPPING THE PUNCH

to the point of borrowing a tool or a ladder or helping to figure out
what was wrong with the car when it wouldn't start. The big apart-
ment house at the corner remained all white until after the war.
Then, in late 1945, when colored people began coming in at the Or-
ange end of the street—the families of professional men mainly, of
teachers, doctors, and dentists—there was a moving van outside
the apartment building every day, and half the white tenants disap-
peared within months. But things soon settled down, and, though
the landlord of the apartment building began renting to colored
just in order to keep the place going, the whites who remained in
the immediate neighborhood stayed around until they had a rea-
son other than Negrophobia to leave.

Go to work. And he rang the doorbell and pushed open the front

door and called, "We're here."

Walt had been unable to make it up that day from Asbury Park

but there, coming out of the kitchen and into the hallway, were his
mother and Ernestine. And there, in their house, was his girl. She
may or may not have been what they were expecting. Coleman's
mother hadn't asked. Since he'd unilaterally made his decision to
join the navy as a white man, she hardly dared ask him anything,
for fear of what she might hear. She was prone now, outside the
hospital—where she had at last become the first colored head floor
nurse of a Newark hospital, and without help from Dr. Fenster-
man—to let Walt take charge of her life and of the family alto-
gether. No, she hadn't asked anything about the girl, politely de-
clined to know, and encouraged Ernestine not to inquire. Coleman,
in turn, hadn't told anyone anything, and so, fair-complexioned as
fair could be, and—with her matching blue handbag and pumps, in
her cotton floral shirtwaist dress and her little white gloves and pill-
box hat—as immaculately trim and correct as any girl alive and
young in 1950, here was Steena Palsson, Iceland and Denmark's
American progeny, of the bloodline going back to King Canute and
beyond.

He had done it, got it his own way, and no one so much as

flinched. Talk about the ability of the species to adapt. Nobody

groped for words, nobody went silent, nor did anyone begin jab-
bering a mile a minute. Commonplaces, yes, cornballisms, you
bet—generalities, truisms, cliches aplenty. Steena hadn't been
raised along the banks of the Otter Tail River for nothing: if it was
hackneyed, she knew how to say it. Chances were that if Coleman
had gotten to blindfold the three women before introducing them
and to keep them blindfolded throughout the day, their conversa-
tion would have had no weightier a meaning than it had while they
smilingly looked one another right in the eye. Nor would it have
embodied an intention other than the standard one: namely, I
won't say anything you can possibly take offense with if you won't
say anything I can take offense with. Respectability at any cost—
that's where the Palssons and the Silks were one.

The point at which all three got addled was, strangely enough,

while discussing Steena's height. True, she was five eleven, nearly
three full inches taller than Coleman and six inches taller than ei-
ther his sister or his mother. But Coleman's father had been six one
and Walt was an inch and a half taller than that, so tallness in and
of itself was nothing new to the family, even if, with Steena and
Coleman, it was the woman who happened to be taller than the
man. Yet those three inches of Steena's—the distance, say, from her
hairline to her eyebrows—caused a careening conversation about
physical anomalies to veer precipitously close to disaster for some
fifteen minutes before Coleman smelled something acrid and the
women—the three of them—rushed for the kitchen to save the bis-
cuits from going up in flames.

After that, throughout dinner and until it was time for the young

couple to return to New York, it was all unflagging rectitude, exter-
nally a Sunday like every nice family's dream of total Sunday happi-
ness and, consequently, strikingly in contrast with life, which, as ex-
perience had already taught even the youngest of these four, could
not for half a minute running be purged of its inherent instability,
let alone be beaten down into a predictable essence.
Not until the train carrying Coleman and Steena back to New

York pulled into Pennsylvania Station early that evening did Steena
break down in tears.

As far as he knew, until then she had been fast asleep with her

head on his shoulder all the way from Jersey—virtually from the
moment they had boarded at Brick Church Station sleeping off the
exhaustion of the afternoon's effort at which she had so excelled.
"Steena—what is wrong?"

"I can't do it!" she cried, and, without another word of explana-

tion, gasping, violently weeping, clutching her bag to her chest—
and forgetting her hat, which was in his lap, where he'd been hold-
ing it while she slept—she raced alone from the train as though
from an attacker and did not phone him or try ever to see him
again.

It was four years later, in 1954, that they nearly collided outside

Grand Central Station and stopped to take each other's hand and to
talk just long enough to stir up the original wonder they'd awak-
ened in each other at twenty-two and eighteen and then to walk on,
crushed by the certainty that nothing as statistically spectacular as
this chance meeting could possibly happen again. He was married
by then, an expectant father, in the city for the day from his job as a
classics instructor at Adelphi, and she was working in an ad agency
down the street on Lexington Avenue, still single, still pretty, but
womanly now, very much a smartly dressed New Yorker and clearly
someone with whom the trip to East Orange might have ended on
a different note if only it had taken place further down the line.

The way it might have ended—the conclusion against which re-

ality had decisively voted—was all he could think about. Stunned
by how little he'd gotten over her and she'd gotten over him, he
walked away understanding, as outside his reading in classical
Greek drama he'd never had to understand before, how easily life
can be one thing rather than another and how accidentally a des-
tiny is made ... on the other hand, how accidental fate may seem
when things can never turn out other than they do. That is, he
walked away understanding nothing, knowing he could understand

THE HUMAN  STAIN

nothing, though with the illusion that he would have metaphysi-
cally understood something of enormous importance about this
stubborn determination of his to become his own man if... if only
such things were understandable.

The charming two-page letter she sent the next week, care of the

college, about how incredibly good he'd been at "swooping" their
first time together in his Sullivan Street room—"swooping, almost
like birds do when they fly over land or sea and spy something
moving, something bursting with life, and dive down . . . and seize
upon it"—began, "Dear Coleman, I was very happy to see you in
New York. Brief as our meeting was, after I saw you I felt an autum-
nal sadness, perhaps because the six years since we first met make it
wrenchingly obvious how many days of my life are 'over.' You look
very good, and I'm glad you're happy . . ." and ended in a languid,
floating finale of seven little sentences and a wistful closing that,
after numerous rereadings, he took as the measure of her regret
for her loss, a veiled admission of remorse as well, poignantly sig-
naling to him a subaudible apology: "Well, that's it. That's enough.
I shouldn't even bother you. I promise I won't ever again. Take care.
Take care. Take care. Take care. Very fondly, Steena."

He never threw the letter away, and when he happened upon it in

his files and, in the midst of whatever else he was doing, paused to
look it over—having otherwise forgotten it for some five or six
years—he thought what he thought out on the street that day after
lightly kissing her cheek and saying goodbye to Steena forever: that
had she married him—as he'd wanted her to—she would have
known everything—as he had wanted her to—and what followed
with his family, with hers, with their own children, would have
been different from what it was with Iris. What happened with his
mother and Walt could as easily never have occurred. Had Steena
said fine, he would have lived another life.

/ can't do it. There was wisdom in that, an awful lot of wisdom

for a young girl, not the kind one ordinarily has at only twenty. But
that's why he'd fallen for her—because she had the wisdom that is
solid, thinking-for-yourself common sense. If she hadn't.. . but if

SLIPPING  THE  PUNCH

she hadn't, she wouldn't have been Steena, and he wouldn't have
wanted her as a wife.

He thought the same useless thoughts—useless to a man of no

great talent like himself, if not to Sophocles: how accidentally a fate
is made ... or how accidental it all may seem when it is inescapable.

As she first portrayed herself and her origins to Coleman, Iris
Gittelman had grown up willful, clever, furtively rebellious—
secretly plotting, from the second grade on, how to escape her op-
pressive surroundings—in a Passaic household rumbling with ha-
tred for every form of social oppression, particularly the authority of
the rabbis and their impinging lies. Her Yiddish-speaking father, as
she characterized him, was such a thoroughgoing heretical anar-
chist that he hadn't even had Iris's two older brothers circumcised,
nor had her parents bothered to acquire a marriage license or to
submit to a civil ceremony. They considered themselves husband
and wife, claimed to be American, even called themselves Jews,
these two uneducated immigrant atheists who spat on the ground
when a rabbi walked by. But they called themselves what they called
themselves freely, without asking permission or seeking approval
from what her father contemptuously described as the hypocritical
enemies of everything that was natural and good—namely, of-
ficialdom, those illegitimately holding the power. On the cracking,
filth-caked wall over the soda fountain of the family candy store on
Myrtle Avenue—a cluttered shop so small, she said, "you couldn't
bury the five of us there side by side"—hung two framed pictures,
one of Sacco, the other of Vanzetti, photographs torn from the ro-
togravure section of the newspaper. Every August 22—the anni-
versary of the day in 1927 when Massachusetts executed the two
anarchists for murders Iris and her brothers were taught to believe
neither man had committed—business was suspended and the
family retreated upstairs to the tiny, dim apartment whose lunatic
disorder exceeded even the store's, so as to observe a day of fasting.
This was a ritual Iris's father had, like a cult leader, dreamed up all
on his own, modeling it wackily on the Jewish Day of Atonement.

Her father had no real ideas about what he thought of as ideas—all
that ran deep was desperate ignorance and the bitter hopelessness
of dispossession, the impotent revolutionary hatred. Everything
was said with a clenched fist, and everything was a harangue. He
knew the names Kropotkin and Bakunin, but nothing of their writ-
ings, and the anarchist Yiddish weekly Freie Arbeiter Stimme, which
he was always carrying around their apartment, he rarely read more
than a few words of each night before dropping off to sleep. Her
parents, she explained to Coleman—and all this dramatically, scan-
dalously dramatically, in a Bleecker Street café minutes after he had
picked her up in Washington Square—her parents were simple
people in the grips of a pipe dream that they could not begin to ar-
ticulate or rationally defend but for which they were zealously will-
ing to sacrifice friends, relatives, business, the good will of neigh-
bors, even their own sanity, even their children's sanity. They knew
only what they had nothing in common with, which to Iris, the
older she got, appeared to be everything. Society as it was consti-
tuted—its forces all in constant motion, the intricate underweb-
bing of interests stretched to its limit, the battle for advantage that
is ongoing, the subjugation that is ongoing, the factional collisions
and collusions, the shrewd jargon of morality, the benign despot
that is convention, the unstable illusion of stability—society as it
was made, always has been and must be made, was as foreign to
them as was King Arthur's court to the Connecticut Yankee. And
yet, this wasn't because they'd been bound by the strongest ties to
some other time and place and then forcefully set down in a wholly
alien world: they were more like people who'd stepped directly into
adulthood from the cradle, having had no intervening education in
how human beastliness is run and ruled. Iris could not decide, from
the time she was a tot, whether she was being raised by crackpots or
visionaries, or whether the passionate loathing she was meant to
share was a revelation of the awful truth or utterly ridiculous and
possibly insane.

All that afternoon she told Coleman folklorishly enchanting sto-

ries that made having survived growing up above the Passaic candy

store as the daughter of such vividly benighted individualists as
Morris and Ethel Gittelman appear to have been a grim adventure
not so much out of Russian literature as out of the Russian funny
papers, as though the Gittelmans had been the deranged next-door
neighbors in a Sunday comic strip called "The Karamazov Kids." It
was a strong, brilliant performance for a girl barely nineteen years
old who had fled from Jersey across the Hudson—as who among
his Village acquaintances wasn't fleeing, and from places as far away
as Amarillo?—without any idea of being anything other than free, a
new impoverished exotic on the Eighth Street stage, a theatrically
big-featured, vivacious dark girl, emotionally a dynamic force and,
in the parlance of the moment, "stacked," a student uptown at the
Art Students League who partly earned her scholarship there mod-
eling for the life drawing classes, someone whose style was to hide
nothing and who appeared to have no more fear of creating a stir in
a public place than a belly dancer. Her head of hair was something,
a labyrinthine, billowing wreath of spirals and ringlets, fuzzy as
twine and large enough for use as Christmas ornamentation. All
the disquiet of her childhood seemed to have passed into the con-
volutions of her sinuous thicket of hair. Her irreversible hair. You
could polish pots with it and no more alter its construction than if
it were harvested from the inky depths of the sea, some kind of wiry
reef-building organism, a dense living onyx hybrid of coral and
shrub, perhaps possessing medicinal properties.

For three hours she held Coleman entranced by her comedy, her

outrage, her hair, and by her flair for manufacturing excitement, by
a frenzied, untrained adolescent intellect and an actressy ability
to enkindle herself and believe her every exaggeration that made
Coleman—a cunning self-concoction if ever there was one, a prod-
uct on which no one but he held a patent—feel by comparison like
somebody with no conception of himself at all.

But when he got her back to Sullivan Street that evening, every-

thing changed. It turned out that she had no idea in the world who
she was. Once you'd made your way past the hair, all she was was
molten. The antithesis of the arrow aimed at life who was twenty-

five-year-old Coleman Silk—a self-freedom fighter too, but the agi-
tated version, the anarchist version, of someone wanting to find her
way.

It wouldn't have fazed her for five minutes to learn that he had

been born and raised in a colored family and identified himself as a
Negro nearly all his life, nor would she have been burdened in the
slightest by keeping that secret for him if it was what he'd asked her
to do. A tolerance for the unusual was not one of Iris Gittelman's
deficiencies—unusual to her was what most conformed to the
standards of legitimacy. To be two men instead of one? To be two
colors instead of one? To walk the streets incognito or in disguise,
to be neither this nor that but something in between? To be pos-
sessed of a double or a triple or a quadruple personality? To her
there was nothing frightening about such seeming deformities.
Iris's open-mindedness wasn't even a moral quality of the sort
liberals and libertarians pride themselves on; it was more on the
order of a mania, the cracked antithesis of bigotry. The expecta-
tions indispensable to most people, the assumption of meaning,
the confidence in authority, the sanctification of coherence and or-
der, struck her as nothing else in life did—as nonsensical, as totally
nuts. Why would things happen as they do and history read as it
does if inherent to existence was something called normalcy?

And yet, what he told Iris was that he was Jewish, Silk being an

Ellis Island attenuation of Silberzweig, imposed on his father by a
charitable customs official. He even bore the biblical mark of cir-
cumcision, as not many of his East Orange Negro friends did in
that era. His mother, working as a nurse at a hospital staffed pre-
dominantly by Jewish doctors, was convinced by burgeoning medi-
cal opinion of the significant hygienic benefits of circumcision, and
so the Silks had arranged for the rite that was traditional among
Jews—and that was beginning, back then, to be elected as a post-
natal surgical procedure by an increasing number of Gentile par-
ents—to be performed by a doctor on each of their infant boys in
the second week of life.
Coleman had been allowing that he was Jewish for several years

SLIPPING   THE   PUNCH

now—or letting people think so if they chose to—since coming to
realize that at NYU as in his cafe hangouts, many people he knew
seemed to have been assuming he was a Jew all along. What he'd
learned in the navy is that all you have to do is give a pretty good
and consistent line about yourself and nobody ever inquires, be-
cause no one's that interested. His NYU and Village acquaintances
could as easily have surmised—as buddies of his had in the ser-
vice—that he was of Middle Eastern descent, but as this was a
moment when Jewish self-infatuation was at a postwar pinnacle
among the Washington Square intellectual avant-garde, when the
aggrandizing appetite driving their Jewish mental audacity was
beginning to look to be uncontrollable and an aura of cultural
significance emanated as much from their jokes and their family
anecdotes, from their laughter and their clowning and their wise-
cracks and their arguments—even from their insults—as from
Commentary, Midstream, and the Partisan Review, who was he not
to go along for the ride, especially as his high school years assisting
Doc Chizner as a boxing instructor of Essex County Jewish kids
made claiming a New Jersey Jewish boyhood not so laden with pit-
falls as pretending to being a U.S. sailor with Syrian or Lebanese
roots. Taking on the ersatz prestige of an aggressively thinking, self-
analytic, irreverent American Jew reveling in the ironies of the mar-
ginal Manhattan existence turned out to be nothing like so reckless
as it might have seemed had he spent years dreaming up and elabo-
rating the disguise on his own, and yet, pleasurably enough, it felt
spectacularly reckless—and when he remembered Dr. Fensterman,
who'd offered his family three thousand dollars for Coleman to
take a dive on his final exams so as to make brilliant Bert the class
valedictorian, it struck him as spectacularly comical too, a colossal
sui generis score-settling joke. What a great all-encompassing idea
the world had had to turn him into this—what sublimely earthly
mischief. If ever there was a perfect one-of-a-kind creation—and
hadn't singularity been his inmost ego-driven ambition all along?
—it was this magical convergence into his father's Fensterman son.
No longer was he playing at something. With Iris—the churned-

THE  HUMAN   STAIN

up, untamed, wholly un-Steena-like, non-Jewish Jewish Iris—as
the medium through which to make himself anew, he'd finally got
it right. He was no longer trying on and casting off, endlessly prac-
ticing and preparing to be. This was it, the solution, the secret to his
secret, flavored with just a drop of the ridiculous—the redeeming,
reassuring ridiculous, life's little contribution to every human deci-
sion.

As a heretofore unknown amalgam of the most unalike of Amer-

ica's historic undesirables, he now made sense.

There was an interlude, however. After Steena and before Iris there
was a five-month interlude named Ellie Magee, a petite, shapely
colored girl, tawny-skinned, lightly freckled across the nose and
cheeks, in appearance not quite over the dividing line between ado-
lescence and womanhood, who worked at the Village Door Shop
on Sixth Avenue, excitedly selling shelving units for books and sell-
ing doors—doors on legs for desks and doors on legs for beds. The
tired old Jewish guy who owned the place said that hiring Ellie had
increased his business by fifty percent. "I had nothing going here,"
he told Coleman. "Eking out a living. But now every guy in the Vil-
lage wants a door for a desk. People come in, they don't ask for
me—they ask for Ellie. They call on the phone, they want to talk to
Ellie. This little gal has changed everything." It was true, nobody
could resist her, including Coleman, who was struck, first, by her
legs up on high heels and then with all her naturalness. Goes out
with white NYU guys who are drawn to her, goes out with colored
NYU guys who are drawn to her—a sparkling twenty-three-year-
old kid, as yet wounded by nothing, who has moved to the Village
from Yonkers, where she grew up, and is living the unconventional
life with a small u, the Village life as advertised. She is a find, and so
Coleman goes in to buy a desk he doesn't need and that night takes
her for a drink. After Steena and the shock of losing someone he'd
so much wanted, he is having a good time again, he's alive again,
and all this from the moment they start flirting in the store. Does
she think he's a white guy in the store? He doesn't know. Interest-

ing. Then that evening she laughs and, comically squinting at him,
says, "What are you anyway?" Right out she spots something and
goes ahead and says it. But now the sweat is not pouring off him as
it did when he misread Steena's poem. "What am I? Play it any way
you like," Coleman says. "Is that the way you play it?" she asks. "Of
course that's the way I play it," he says. "So white girls think you're
white?" "Whatever they think," he says, "I let them think." "And
whatever I think?" Ellie asks. "Same deal," Coleman says. That's the
little game they play, and that becomes the excitement for them,
playing the ambiguity of it. He's not that close to anybody particu-
larly, but the guys he knows from school think he's taking out a col-
ored girl, and her friends all think she's going around with a white
guy. There's some real fun in having other people find them impor-
tant, and most everywhere they go, people do. It's 1951. Guys ask
Coleman, "What's she like?" "Hot," he says, drawing the word out
while floppily wiggling one hand the way the Italians did back in
East Orange. There's a day-to-day, second-to-second kick in all this,
a little movie-star magnitude to his life now: he's always in a scene
when he's out with Ellie. Nobody on Eighth Street knows what the
hell is going on, and he enjoys that. She's got the legs. She laughs all
the time. She's a woman in a natural way—full of ease and a lively
innocence that's enchanting to him. Something like Steena, except
she's not white, with the result that they don't go rushing off to visit
his family and they don't go visiting hers. Why should they? They
live in the Village. Taking her to East Orange doesn't even occur to
him. Maybe it's because he doesn't want to hear the sigh of relief, to
be told, even wordlessly, that he's doing the right thing. He thinks
about his motivation for bringing Steena home. To be honest with
everyone? And what did that achieve? No, no families—not for now
anyway.

Meanwhile, he so enjoys being with her that one night the truth

just comes bubbling out. Even about his being a boxer, which he
could never tell Steena. It's so easy to tell Ellie. That she's not disap-
proving gives her another boost up in his estimation. She's not con-
ventional—and yet so sound. He is dealing with someone utterly

unnarrow-minded. The splendid girl wants to hear it all. And so he
talks, and without restraints he is an extraordinary talker, and Ellie
is enthralled. He tells her about the navy. He tells her about his fam-
ily, which turns out to be a family not much different from hers, ex-
cept that her father, a pharmacist with a drugstore in Harlem, is liv-
ing, and though he isn't happy about her having moved to the
Village, fortunately for Ellie he can't stop himself from adoring her.
Coleman tells her about Howard and how he couldn't stand the
place. They talk a lot about Howard because that was where her
parents had wanted her to go too. And always, whatever they're
talking about, he finds he is effortlessly making her laugh. "I'd
never seen so many colored people before, not even in south Jersey
at the family reunion. Howard University looked to me like just too
many Negroes in one place. Of all persuasions, of every stripe, but I
just did not want to be around them like that. Did not at all see
what it had to do with me. Everything there was just so concen-
trated that any sort of pride I ever had was diminished. Completely
diminished by a concentrated, false environment." "Like a soda
that's too sweet," Ellie said. "Well," he told her, "it's not so much
that too much has been put in, it's that everything else has been
taken out." Talking openly with Ellie, Coleman finds all his relief.
True, he's not a hero anymore, but then he's not in any way a villain
either. Yes, she's a contender, this one. Her transcendence into inde-
pendence, her transformation into a Village girl, the way she han-
dles her folks—she seems to have grown up the way you're sup-
posed to be able to.

One evening she takes him around to a tiny Bleecker Street

jewelry shop where the white guy who owns it makes beautiful
things out of enamel. Just shopping the street, out looking, but
when they leave she tells Coleman that the guy is black. "You're
wrong," Coleman tells her, "he can't be." "Don't tell me that I'm
wrong"—she laughs—"you're blind." Another night, near mid-
night, she takes him to a bar on Hudson Street where painters con-
gregate to drink. "See that one? The smoothie?" she says in a soft
voice, inclining her head toward a good-looking white guy in his

SLIPPING  THE  PUNCH

mid-twenties charming all the girls at the bar. "Him," she says.
"No," says Coleman, who's the one laughing now. "You're in Green-
wich Village, Coleman Silk, the four freest square miles in America.
There's one on every other block. You're so vain, you thought you'd
dreamed it up yourself." And if she knows of three—which she
does, positively—there are ten, if not more. "From all over every-
where," she says, "they make straight for Eighth Street. Just like you
did from little East Orange." "And," he says, "I don't see it at all."
And that too makes them laugh, laugh and laugh and laugh be-
cause he is hopeless and cannot see it in others and because Ellie is
his guide, pointing them out.

In the beginning, he luxuriates in the solution to his problem.

Losing the secret, he feels like a boy again. The boy he'd been before
he had the secret. A kind of imp again. He gets from all her natural-
ness the pleasure and ease of being natural himself. If you're going
to be a knight and a hero, you're armored, and what he gets now is
the pleasure of being unarmored. "You're a lucky man," Ellie's boss
tells him. "A lucky man," he repeats, and means it. With Ellie the se-
cret is no longer operative. It's not only that he can tell her every-
thing and that he does, it's that if and when he wants to, he can now
go home. He can deal with his brother, and the other way, he
knows, he could never have. His mother and he can go on back and
resume being as close and easygoing as they always were. And then
he meets Iris, and that's it. It's been fun with Ellie, and it continues
to be fun, but some dimension is missing. The whole thing lacks the
ambition—it fails to feed that conception of himself that's been
driving him all his life. Along comes Iris and he's back in the ring.
His father had said to him, "Now you can retire undefeated. You're
retired." But here he comes roaring out of his corner—he has the
secret again. And the gift to be secretive again, which is hard to
come by. Maybe there are a dozen more guys like him hanging
around the Village. But not just everybody has that gift. That is,
they have it, but in petty ways: they simply lie all the time. They're
not secretive in the grand and elaborate way that Coleman is. He's
back on the trajectory outward. He's got the elixir of the secret, and

it's like being fluent in another language—it's being somewhere
that is constantly fresh to you. He's lived without it, it was fine,
nothing horrible happened, it wasn't objectionable. It was fun. In-
nocent fun. But insufficiently everything else. Sure, he'd regained
his innocence. Ellie gave him that all right. But what use is inno-
cence? Iris gives more. She raises everything to another pitch. Iris
gives him back his life on the scale he wants to live it.

Two years after they met, they decided to get married, and that was
when, for this license he'd taken, this freedom he'd sounded, the
choices he had dared to make—and could he really have been any
more artful or clever in arriving at an actable self big enough to
house his ambition and formidable enough to take on the world?—
the first large payment was exacted.

did not know of Iris Gittelman's existence, though she wasn't at all
surprised when he told her that he was going to get married and
that the girl was white. She wasn't even surprised when he told her
that the girl didn't know he was colored. If anyone was surprised,
it was Coleman, who, having openly declared his intention, all at
once wondered if this entire decision, the most monumental of
his life, wasn't based on the least serious thing imaginable: Iris's
hair, that sinuous thicket of hair that was far more Negroid than
Coleman's—more like Ernestine's hair than his. As a little girl,
Ernestine was famous for asking, "Why don't I have blow hair like
Mommy?"—meaning, why didn't her hair blow in the breeze, not
only like her mother's but like the hair of all the women on the ma-
ternal side of the family.

man the eerie, crazy fear that all that he had ever wanted from Iris
Gittelman was the explanation her appearance could provide for
the texture of their children's hair.

But how could a motive as bluntly, as dazzlingly utilitarian as

that have escaped his attention till now? Because it wasn't in any

SLIPPING  THE  PUNCH

way true? Seeing his mother suffering like this—inwardly shaken by
his own behavior and yet resolved, as Coleman always was, to carry
through to the finish—how could this startling idea seem to him
anything other than true? Even as he remained seated across from
his mother in what appeared to be a state of perfect self-control, he
had the definite impression that he had just chosen a wife for the
stupidest reason in the world and that he was the emptiest of men.

"And she believes your parents are dead, Coleman. That's what

you told her."
"That's right."

"You have no brother, you have no sister. There is no Ernestine.

There is no Walt."
He nodded.
"And? What else did you tell her?"
"What else do you think I told her?"

"Whatever it suited you to tell her." That was as harsh as she got

all afternoon. Her capacity for anger never had been and never
would be able to extend to him. The mere sight of him, from the
moment of his birth, stimulated feelings against which she had no
defenses and that had nothing to do with what he was worthy of.
"I'm never going to know my grandchildren," she said.

He had prepared himself. The important thing was to forget

about Iris's hair and let her speak, let her find her fluency and, from
the soft streaming of her own words, create for him his apologia.

"You're never going to let them see me," she said. "You're never

going to let them know who I am. 'Mom,' you'll tell me, 'Ma, you
come to the railroad station in New York, and you sit on the bench
in the waiting room, and at eleven twenty-five A.M., I'll walk by
with my kids in their Sunday best.' That'll be my birthday present
five years from now. 'Sit there, Mom, say nothing, and I'll just walk
them slowly by.' And you know very well that I will be there. The
railroad station. The zoo. Central Park. Wherever you say, of course
I'll do it. You tell me the only way I can ever touch my grandchil-
dren is for you to hire me to come over as Mrs. Brown to baby-sit

and put them to bed, I'll do it. Tell me to come over as Mrs. Brown
to clean your house, I'll do that. Sure I'll do what you tell me. I have
no choice."
"Don't you?"
"A choice? Yes? What is my choice, Coleman?"
"To disown me."

Almost mockingly, she pretended to give that idea some thought.

"I suppose I could be that ruthless with you. Yes, that's possible, I
suppose. But where do you think I'm going to find the strength to
be that ruthless with myself?"

It was not a moment for him to be recalling his childhood. It was

not a moment for him to be admiring her lucidity or her sarcasm
or her courage. It was not a moment to allow himself to be subju-
gated by the all-but-pathological phenomenon of mother love. It
was not a moment for him to be hearing all the words that she was
not saying but that were sounded more tellingly even than what she
did say. It was not a moment to think thoughts other than the
thoughts he'd come armed with. It was certainly not a moment to
resort to explanations, to start brilliantly toting up the advantages
and the disadvantages and pretend that this was no more than a
logical decision. There was no explanation that could begin to ad-
dress the outrage of what he was doing to her. It was a moment to
deepen his focus on what he was there to achieve. If disowning him
was a choice foreclosed to her, then taking the blow was all she
could do. Speak quietly, say little, forget Iris's hair, and, for however
long is required, let her continue to employ her words to absorb
into her being the brutality of the most brutal thing he had ever
done.

He was murdering her. You don't have to murder your father.

The world will do that for you. There are plenty of forces out to get
your father. The world will take care of him, as it had indeed taken
care of Mr. Silk. Who there is to murder is the mother, and that's
what he saw he was doing to her, the boy who'd been loved as he'd
been loved by this woman. Murdering her on behalf of his exhila-
rating notion of freedom! It would have been much easier without

SLIPPING  THE  PUNCH

her. But only through this test can he be the man he has chosen to
be, unalterably separated from what he was handed at birth, free to
struggle at being free like any human being would wish to be free.
To get that from life, the alternate destiny, on one's own terms, he
must do what must be done. Don't most people want to walk out of
the fucking lives they've been handed? But they don't, and that's
what makes them them, and this was what was making him him.
Throw the punch, do the damage, and forever lock the door. You
can't do this to a wonderful mother who loves you unconditionally
and has made you happy, you can't inflict this pain and then think
you can go back on it. It's so awful that all you can do is live with it.
Once you've done a thing like this, you have done so much violence
it can never be undone—which is what Coleman wants. It's like that
moment at West Point when the guy was going down. Only the ref-
eree could save him from what Coleman had it in him to do. Then
as now, he was experiencing the power of it as a fighter. Because
that is the test too, to give the brutality of the repudiation its real,
unpardonable human meaning, to confront with all the realism
and clarity possible the moment when your fate intersects with
something enormous. This is his. This man and his mother. This
woman and her beloved son. If, in the service of honing himself, he
is out to do the hardest thing imaginable, this is it, short of stabbing
her. This takes him right to the heart of the matter. This is the ma-
jor act of his life, and vividly, consciously, he feels its immensity.

"I don't know why I'm not better prepared for this, Coleman. I

should be," she said. "You've been giving fair warning almost from
the day you got here. You were seriously disinclined even to take the
breast. Yes, you were. Now I see why. Even that might delay your es-
cape. There was always something about our family, and I don't
mean color—there was something about us that impeded you. You
think like a prisoner. You do, Coleman Brutus. You're white as snow
and you think like a slave."

It was not a moment to give credence to her intelligence, to take

even the most appealing turn of phrase as the embodiment of some
special wisdom. It often happened that his mother could say some-

thing that made it sound as though she knew more than she did.
The rational other side. That was what came of leaving the orating
to his father and so seeming by comparison to say what counted.

"Now, I could tell you that there is no escape, that all your at-

tempts to escape will only lead you back to where you began. That's
what your father would tell you. And there'd be something in Julius
Caesar to back him up. But for a young man like you, whom every-
body falls for? A good-looking, charming, clever young fellow with
your physique, your determination, your shrewdness, with all your
wonderful gifts? You with your green eyes and your long dark
lashes? Why, this should cause you no trouble at all. I expect com-
ing to see me is about as hard as it's going to get, and look how
calmly you're sitting here. And that is because you know what
you're doing makes great sense, I know it makes sense, because you
would not pursue a goal that didn't. Of course you will have disap-
pointments. Of course little is going to turn out as you imagine it,
sitting so calmly across from me. Your special destiny will be special
all right—but how? Twenty-six years old—you can't begin to know.
But wouldn't the same be true if you did nothing? I suppose any
profound change in life involves saying 'I don't know you' to some-
one."

She went on for nearly two hours, a long speech about his auton-

omy dating back to infancy, expertly taking in the pain by delineat-
ing all she was up against and couldn't hope to oppose and would
have to endure, during which Coleman did all he could not to
notice—in the simplest things, like the thinning of her hair (his
mother's hair, not Iris's hair) and the jutting of her head, the swell-
ing of her ankles, the bloating of her belly, the exaggerated splay of
her large teeth—how much further along toward her death she'd
been drawn since the Sunday three years back when she'd done ev-
erything gracious she could to put Steena at her ease. At some point
midway through the afternoon, she seemed to Coleman to step up
to the very edge of the big change: the point of turning, as the el-
derly do, into a tiny, misshapen being. The longer she talked, the
more he believed he was seeing this happen. He tried not to think

SLIPPING  THE  PUNCH

about the disease that would kill her, about the funeral they would
give her, about the tributes that would be read and the prayers of-
fered up at the side of her grave. But then he tried not to think
about her going on living either, of his leaving and her being here
and alive, the years passing and her thinking about him and his
children and his wife, more years passing and the connection be-
tween the two of them only growing stronger for her because of its
denial.

Neither his mother's longevity nor her mortality could be al-

lowed to have any bearing on what he was doing, nor could the
struggles her family had been through in Lawnside, where she'd
been born in a dilapidated shack and lived with her parents and
four brothers until her father died when she was seven. Her father's
people had been in Lawnside, New Jersey, since 1855. They were
runaway slaves, brought north on the Underground Railroad from
Maryland and into southwest Jersey by the Quakers. The Negroes
first called the place Free Haven. No whites lived there then, and
only a handful did now, out on the fringes of a town of a couple of
thousand where just about everybody was descended from run-
away slaves whom the Haddonfield Quakers had protected—the
mayor was descended from them, the fire chief, the police chief,
the tax collector, the teachers in the grade school, the kids in the
grade school. But the uniqueness of Lawnside as a Negro town had
no bearing on anything either. Nor did the uniqueness of Gould-
town, farther south in Jersey, down by Cape May. That's where
her mother's people were from, and that's where the family went to
live after the death of her father. Another settlement of colored
people, many nearly white, including her own grandmother, every-
one somehow related to everyone else. "Way, way back," as she used
to explain to Coleman when he was a boy—simplifying and con-
densing as best she could all the lore she'd ever heard—a slave was
owned by a Continental Army soldier who'd been killed in the
French and Indian War. The slave looked after the soldier's widow.
He did everything, from dawn to dark didn't stop doing what
needed to be done. He chopped and hauled the wood, gathered the

crops, excavated and built a cabbage house and stowed the cab-
bages there, stored the pumpkins, buried the apples, turnips, and
potatoes in the ground for winter, stacked the rye and wheat in the
barn, slaughtered the pig, salted the pork, slaughtered the cow and
corned the beef, until one day the widow married him and they had
three sons. And those sons married Gouldtown girls whose families
reached back to the settlement's origins in the 1600s, families that
by the Revolution were all intermarried and thickly intermingled.
One or another or all of them, she said, were descendants of the
Indian from the large Lenape settlement at Indian Fields who mar-
ried a Swede—locally Swedes and Finns had superseded the origi-
nal Dutch settlers—and who had five children with her; one or an-
other or all were descendants of the two mulatto brothers brought
from the West Indies on a trading ship that sailed up the river from
Greenwich to Bridgeton, where they were indentured to the land-
owners who had paid their passage and who themselves later paid
the passage of two Dutch sisters to come from Holland to become
their wives; one or another or all were descendants of the grand-
daughter of John Fenwick, an English baronet's son, a cavalry of-
ficer in Cromwell's Commonwealth army and a member of the
Society of Friends who died in New Jersey not that many years
after New Cesarea (the province lying between the Hudson and the
Delaware that was deeded by the brother of the king of England to
two English proprietors) became New Jersey. Fenwick died in 1683
and was buried somewhere in the personal colony he purchased,
founded, and governed, and which stretched north of Bridgeton to
Salem and south and east to the Delaware.

Fenwick's nineteen-year-old granddaughter, Elizabeth Adams,

married a colored man, Gould. "That black that hath been the ruin
of her" was her grandfather's description of Gould in the will from
which he excluded Elizabeth from any share of his estate until such
time as "the Lord open her eyes to see her abominable transgres-
sion against Him." As the story had it, only one son of the five sons
of Gould and Elizabeth survived to maturity, and he was Benjamin
Gould, who married a Finn, Ann. Benjamin died in 1777, the year

SLIPPING  THE  PUNCH

after the signing of the Declaration of Independence across the
Delaware in Philadelphia, leaving a daughter, Sarah, and four sons,
Anthony, Samuel, Abijah, and Elisha, from whom Gouldtown took
its name.

Through his mother, Coleman learned the maze of family his-

tory going back to the days of aristocratic John Fenwick, who was
to that southwestern region of New Jersey what William Penn was
to the part of Pennsylvania that encompassed Philadelphia—and
from whom it sometimes seemed all of Gouldtown had de-
scended—and then he heard it again, though never the same in all
its details, from great-aunts and great-uncles, from great-great-
aunts and -uncles, some of them people close to a hundred, when,
as children, he, Walt, and Ernestine went with their parents down
to Gouldtown for the annual reunion—almost two hundred rela-
tives from southwest Jersey, from Philadelphia, from Atlantic City,
from as far off as Boston, eating fried bluefish, stewed chicken, fried
chicken, homemade ice cream, sugared peaches, pies, and cakes—
eating favorite family dishes and playing baseball and singing songs
and reminiscing all day long, telling stories about the women way
back spinning and knitting, boiling fat pork and baking huge
breads for the men to take to the fields, making the clothes, drawing
the water from the well, administering medicines obtained mainly
from the woods, herb infusions to treat measles, the syrups of mo-
lasses and onions to counter whooping cough. Stories about family
women who kept a dairy making fine cheeses, about women who
went to the city of Philadelphia to become housekeepers, dress-
makers, and schoolteachers, and about women at home of remark-
able hospitality. Stories about the men in the woods, trapping and
shooting the winter game for meat, about the farmers plowing the
fields, cutting the cordwood and the rails for fences, buying, selling,
slaughtering the cattle, and the prosperous ones, the dealers, selling
tons of salt hay for packing to the Trenton pottery works, hay cut
from the salt marsh they owned along the bay and river shores.
Stories about the men who left the woods, the farm, the marsh, and
the cedar swamp to serve—some as white soldiers, some as black—

THE HUMAN  STAIN

in the Civil War. Stories about men who went to sea to become
blockade runners and who went to Philadelphia to become under-
takers, printers, barbers, electricians, cigar makers, and ministers in
the African Methodist Episcopal Church—one who went to Cuba
to ride with Teddy Roosevelt and his Rough Riders, and a few men
who got in trouble, ran away, and never came back. Stories about
family children like themselves, often dressed poorly, without shoes
sometimes or coats, asleep on winter nights in the freezing rooms
of simple houses, in the heat of summer pitching, loading, and
hauling hay with the men, but taught manners by their parents, and
catechized in the schoolhouse by the Presbyterians—where they
also learned to spell and read—and always eating all they wanted,
even in those days, of pork and potatoes and bread and molasses
and game, and growing up strong and healthy and honest.

But one no more decides not to become a boxer because of the

history of Lawnside's runaway slaves, the abundance of everything
at the Gouldtown reunions, and the intricacy of the family's Ameri-
can genealogy—or not to become a teacher of classics because of
the history of Lawnside's runaway slaves, the abundance of the
Gouldtown reunions, and the intricacy of the family's American
genealogy—than one decides not to become anything else for such
reasons. Many things vanish out of a family's life. Lawnside is one,
Gouldtown another, genealogy a third, and Coleman Silk was a
fourth.

Over these last fifty years or more, he was not the first child, ei-

ther, who'd heard about the harvesting of the salt hay for the Tren-
ton pottery works or eaten fried bluefish and sugared peaches at the
Gouldtown reunions and grown up to vanish like this—to vanish,
as they used to say in the family, "till all trace of him was lost." "Lost
himself to all his people" was another way they put it.

Ancestor worship—that's how Coleman put it. Honoring the

past was one thing—the idolatry that is ancestor worship was some-
thing else. The hell with that imprisonment.

That night after coming back to the Village from East Orange,

Coleman got a call from his brother in Asbury Park that took things

SLIPPING  THE   PUNCH

further faster than he had planned. "Don't you ever come around
her," Walt warned him, and his voice was resonant with something
barely suppressed—all the more frightening for being suppressed—
that Coleman hadn't heard since his father's time. There's another
force in that family, pushing him now all the way over on the other
side. The act was committed in 1953 by an audacious young man in
Greenwich Village, by a specific person in a specific place at a
specific time, but now he will be over on the other side forever. Yet
that, as he discovers, is exactly the point: freedom is dangerous.
Freedom is very dangerous. And nothing is on your own terms for
long. "Don't you even try to see her. No contact. No calls. Nothing.
Never. Hear me?" Walt said. "Never. Don't you dare ever show your
lily-white face around that house again!"

What Do You Do with the Kid

Who Can't Read?

IF CLINTON had fucked her in the ass, she might have shut her
mouth. Bill Clinton is not the man they say he is. Had he turned her
over in the Oval Office and fucked her in the ass, none of this would
have happened."

"Well, he never dominated her. He played it safe."
"You see, once he got to the White House, he didn't dominate

anymore. Couldn't. He didn't dominate Willey either. That's why
she got angry with him. Once he became president, he lost his Ar-
kansas ability to dominate women. So long as he was attorney gen-
eral and governor of an obscure little state, that was perfect for
him."

"Sure. Gennifer Flowers."
"What happens in Arkansas? If you fall when you're still back in

Arkansas, you don't fall from a very great height."

"Right. And you're expected to be an ass man. There's a tradi-

tion."

"But when you get to the White House, you can't dominate. And

when you can't dominate, then Miss Willey turns against you, and
Miss Monica turns against you. Her loyalty would have been earned

by fucking her in the ass. That should be the pact. That should seal
you together. But there was no pact."

"Well, she was frightened. She was close to not saying anything,

you know. Starr overwhelmed her. Eleven guys in the room with
her at that hotel? Hitting on her? It was a gang bang. It was a gang
rape that Starr staged there at that hotel."

"Yeah. True. But she was talking to Linda Tripp."
"Oh, right."
"She was talking to everybody. She's part of that dopey culture.

Yap, yap, yap. Part of this generation that is proud of its shallow-
ness. The sincere performance is everything. Sincere and empty, to-
tally empty. The sincerity that goes in all directions. The sincerity
that is worse than falseness, and the innocence that is worse than
corruption. All the rapacity hidden under the sincerity. And under
the lingo. This wonderful language they all have—that they appear
to believe—about their lack of self-worth,' all the while what they
actually believe is that they're entitled to everything. Their shame-
lessness they call lovingness, and the ruthlessness is camouflaged as
lost 'self-esteem.' Hitler lacked self-esteem too. That was his prob-
lem. It's a con these kids have going. The hyperdramatization of the
pettiest emotions. Relationship. My relationship. Clarify my rela-
tionship. They open their mouths and they send me up the wall.
Their whole language is a summation of the stupidity of the last
forty years. Closure. There's one. My students cannot stay in that
place where thinking must occur. Closure! They fix on the conven-
tionalized narrative, with its beginning, middle, and end—every
experience, no matter how ambiguous, no matter how knotty or
mysterious, must lend itself to this normalizing, conventionalizing,
anchorman cliche. Any kid who says 'closure' I flunk. They want
closure, there's their closure."

"Well, whatever she is—a total narcissist, a conniving little bitch,

the most exhibitionistic Jewish girl in the history of Beverly Hills,
utterly corrupted by privilege—he knew it all beforehand. He
could read her. If he can't read Monica Lewinsky, how can he read
Saddam Hussein? If he can't read and outfox Monica Lewinsky, the

guy shouldn't be president. There's genuine grounds for impeach-
ment. No, he saw it. He saw it all. I don't think he was hypnotized by
her cover story for long. That she was totally corrupt and totally in-
nocent, of course he saw it. The extreme innocence was the corrup-
tion—it was her corruption and her madness and her cunning.
That was her force, that combination. That she had no depth, that
was her charm at the end of his day of being commander in chief.
The intensity of the shallowness was its appeal. Not to mention the
shallowness of the intensity. The stories about her childhood. The
boasting about her adorable willfulness: 'See, I was three but I was
already a personality.' I'm sure he understood that everything he
did that didn't conform to her delusions was going to be yet an-
other brutal blow to her self-esteem. But what he didn't see was that
he had to fuck her in the ass. Why? To shut her up. Strange behavior
in our president. It was the first thing she showed him. She stuck it
in his face. She offered it to him. And he did nothing about it. I
don't get this guy. Had he fucked her in the ass, I doubt she would
have talked to Linda Tripp. Because she wouldn't have wanted to
talk about that."

"She wanted to talk about the cigar."
"That's different. That's kid stuff. No, he didn't give her regularly

something she didn't want to talk about. Something he wanted that
she didn't. That's the mistake."

"In the ass is how you create loyalty."
"I don't know if that would have shut her up. I don't know that

shutting her up is humanly possible. This isn't Deep Throat. This is
Big Mouth."

"Still, you have to admit that this girl has revealed more about

America than anybody since Dos Passos. She stuck a thermometer
up the country's ass. Monica's U.S.A."

"The trouble was she was getting from Clinton what she got

from all these guys. She wanted something else from him. He's the
president, she's a love terrorist. She wanted him to be different from
this teacher she had an affair with."

"Yeah, the niceness did him in. Interesting. Not his brutality but

his niceness. Playing it not by his rules but by hers. She controls
him because he wants it. Has to have it. It's all wrong. You know
what Kennedy would have told her when she came around ask-
ing for a job? You know what Nixon would have told her? Harry
Truman, even Eisenhower would have told it to her. The general
who ran World War II, he knew how not to be nice. They would
have told her that not only would they not give her a job, but no-
body would ever give her a job again as long as she lived. That she
wouldn't be able to get a job driving a cab in Horse Springs, New
Mexico. Nothing. That her father's practice would be sabotaged,
and he'd be out of work. That her mother would never work again,
that her brother would never work again, that nobody in her family
would earn another dime, if she so much as dared to open her
mouth about the eleven blow jobs. Eleven. Not even a round dozen.
I don't think under a dozen in over two years qualifies for the
Heisman in debauchery, do you?"

"His caution, his caution did him in. Absolutely. He played it like

a lawyer."

"He didn't want to give her any evidence. That's why he wouldn't

come."

"There he was right. The moment he came, he was finished. She

had the goods. Collected a sample. The smoking come. Had he
fucked her in the ass, the nation could have been spared this terrible
trauma."

They laughed. There were three of them.
"He never really abandoned himself to it. He had an eye on the

door. He had his own system there. She was trying to up the ante."

"Isn't this what the Mafia does? You give somebody something

they can't talk about. Then you've got them."

"You involve them in a mutual transgression, and you have a

mutual corruption. Sure."

"So his problem is that he's insufficiently corrupt."
"Oh, yes. Absolutely. And unsophisticated."
"It's just the opposite of the charge that he's reprehensible. He's

insufficiently reprehensible."

• 149 •

"Of course. If you're engaged in that behavior, why draw the line

there? Wasn't that fairly artificial?"

"Once you draw the line, you make it clear that you're frightened.

And when you're frightened, you're finished. Your destruction is no
further than Monica's cell phone."

"He didn't want to lose control, you see. Remember he said, I

don't want to be hooked on you, I don't want to be addicted to you?
That struck me as true."

"I thought that was a line."
"I don't think so. I think probably the way she remembered it, it

sounds like a line, but I think the motivation—no, he didn't want
the sexual hook. She was good but she was replaceable."

"Everybody's replaceable."
"But you don't know what his experience was. He wasn't into

hookers and that kind of stuff."

"Kennedy was into hookers."
"Oh yeah. The real stuff. This guy Clinton, this is schoolboy

stuff."

"I don't think he was a schoolboy when he was down in Arkan-

sas."

"No, the scale was right in Arkansas. Here it was all out of whack.

And it must have driven him crazy. President of the United States,
he has access to everything, and he can't touch it. This was hell. Es-
pecially with that goody two-shoes wife."

"She's goody two-shoes, you think?"
"Oh, sure."
"Her and Vince Foster?"
"Well, she would fall in love with somebody, but she never would

have done anything crazy because he was married. She could make
even adultery boring. She's a real de-transgressor."

"You think she was fucking Foster?"
"Yes. Oh yeah."
"Now the whole world has fallen in love with goody two-shoes.

That's exactly what they've fallen in love with."

"Clinton's genius was to give Vince Foster a job in Washington.

Put him right there. Make him do his personal bit for the adminis-
tration. That's genius. There Clinton acted like a good Mafia don
and had that on her."

see, he had only Vernon Jordan to talk to about Monica. Who was
probably the best person to talk to. But they couldn't figure that
out. Because they thought she was blabbing just to her stupid little
California Valley Girls. Okay. So what. But that this Linda Tripp,
this Iago, this undercover Iago that Starr had working in the White
House—"

At this point, Coleman got up from where he was seated and

headed toward the campus. That was all of the chorus Coleman
overheard while sitting on a bench on the green, contemplating
what move he'd make next. He didn't recognize their voices, and
since their backs were to him and their bench was around the other
side of the tree from his, he couldn't see their faces. His guess was
that they were three young guys, new to the faculty since his time,
on the town green drinking bottled water or decaf out of contain-
ers, just back from a workout on the town tennis courts, and relax-
ing together, talking over the day's Clinton news before heading
home to their wives and children. To him they sounded sexually
savvy and sexually confident in ways he didn't associate with young
assistant professors, particularly at Athena. Pretty rough talk, pretty
raw for academic banter. Too bad these tough guys hadn't been
around in his time. They might have served as a cadre of resistance
against... No, no. Up on the campus, where not everyone's a tennis
buddy, this sort of force tends to get dissipated in jokes when it's
not entirely self-suppressed—they would probably have been no
more forthcoming than the rest of the faculty when it came to ral-
lying behind him. Anyway, he didn't know them and didn't want to.
He knew no one any longer. For two years now, all the while he was
writing Spooks, he had cut himself off completely from the friends
and colleagues and associates of a lifetime, and so not until today—
just before noon, following the meeting with Nelson Primus that
had ended not merely badly but stunningly badly, with Coleman

astounding himself by his vituperative words—had he come any-
where near leaving Town Street, as he was doing now, and heading
down South Ward and then, at the Civil War monument, climbing
the hill to the campus. Chances were there'd be no one he knew for
him to bump into, except perhaps whoever might be teaching the
retired who came in July to spend a couple of weeks in the college's
Elderhostel program, which included visits to the Tanglewood con-
certs, the Stockbridge galleries, and the Norman Rockwell Mu-
seum.

It was these very summer students he saw first when he reached

the crest of the hill and emerged from behind the old astronomy
building onto the sun-speckled main quadrangle, more kitschily
collegiate-looking at that moment than even on the cover of the
Athena catalog. They were heading to the cafeteria for lunch, me-
andering in pairs along one of the tree-lined quadrangle's criss-
crossing paths. A procession of twos: husbands and wives together,
pairs of husbands and pairs of wives, pairs of widows, pairs of wid-
owers, pairs of rearranged widows and widowers—or so Coleman
took them to be—who had teamed up as couples after meeting
here in their Elderhostel classes. All were neatly dressed in light
summer clothes, a lot of shirts and blouses of bright pastel shades,
trousers of white or light khaki, some Brooks Brothers summer-
time plaid. Most of the men were wearing visored caps, caps of ev-
ery color, many of them stitched with the logos of professional
sports teams. No wheelchairs, no walkers, no crutches, no canes
that he could see. Spry people his age, seemingly no less fit than
he was, some a bit younger, some obviously older but enjoying
what retirement freedom was meant to provide for those fortunate
enough to breathe more or less easily, to ambulate more or less
painlessly, and to think more or less clearly. This was where he was
supposed to be. Paired off properly. Appropriately.

Appropriate. The current code word for reining in most any de-

viation from the wholesome guidelines and thereby making every-
body "comfortable." Doing not what he was being judged to be
doing but doing instead, he thought, what was deemed suitable

WHAT  DO  YOU  D O . . . ?

by God only knows which of our moral philosophers. Barbara
Walters? Joyce Brothers? William Bennett? Dateline NBC If he
were around this place as a professor, he could teach "Appropriate
Behavior in Classical Greek Drama," a course that would be over
before it began.

They were on their way to lunch, passing within sight of North

Hall, the ivied, beautifully weathered colonial brick building where,
for over a decade, Coleman Silk, as faculty dean, had occupied
the office across from the president's suite. The college's architec-
tural marker, the six-sided clock tower of North Hall, topped by the
spire that was topped by the flag—and that, from down in Athena
proper, could be seen the way the massive European cathedrals are
discerned from the approaching roadways by those repairing for
the cathedral town—was tolling noon as he sat on a bench shad-
owed by the quadrangle's most famously age-gnarled oak, sat and
calmly tried to consider the coercions of propriety. The tyranny of
propriety. It was hard, halfway through 1998, for even him to be-
lieve in American propriety's enduring power, and he was the one
who considered himself tyrannized: the bridle it still is on public
rhetoric, the inspiration it provides for personal posturing, the per-
sistence just about everywhere of this de-virilizing pulpit virtue-
mongering that H. L. Mencken identified with boobism, that Philip
Wylie thought of as Momism, that the Europeans unhistorically
call American puritanism, that the likes of a Ronald Reagan call
America's core values, and that maintains widespread jurisdiction
by masquerading itself as something else—as everything else. As a
force, propriety is protean, a dominatrix in a thousand disguises,
infiltrating, if need be, as civic responsibility, WASP dignity,
women's rights, black pride, ethnic allegiance, or emotion-laden
Jewish ethical sensitivity. It's not as though Marx or Freud or Dar-
win or Stalin or Hitler or Mao had never happened—it's as though
Sinclair Lewis had not happened. It's, he thought, as though Babbitt
had never been written. It's as though not even that most basic level
of imaginative thought had been admitted into consciousness to
cause the slightest disturbance. A century of destruction unlike any

other in its extremity befalls and blights the human race—scores of
millions of ordinary people condemned to suffer deprivation upon
deprivation, atrocity upon atrocity, evil upon evil, half the world
or more subjected to pathological sadism as social policy, whole so-
cieties organized and fettered by the fear of violent persecution,
the degradation of individual life engineered on a scale unknown
throughout history, nations broken and enslaved by ideological
criminals who rob them of everything, entire populations so de-
moralized as to be unable to get out of bed in the morning with the
minutest desire to face the day... all the terrible touchstones pre-
sented by this century, and here they are up in arms about Faunia
Farley. Here in America either it's Faunia Farley or it's Monica
Lewinsky! The luxury of these lives disquieted so by the inappro-
priate comportment of Clinton and Silk! This, in 1998, is the wick-
edness they have to put up with. This, in 1998, is their torture, their
torment, and their spiritual death. Their source of greatest moral
despair, Faunia blowing me and me fucking Faunia. I'm depraved
not simply for having once said the word "spooks" to a class of
white students—and said it, mind you, not while standing there re-
viewing the legacy of slavery, the fulminations of the Black Pan-
thers, the metamorphoses of Malcolm X, the rhetoric of James
Baldwin, or the radio popularity of Amos 'n' Andy, but while rou-
tinely calling the roll. I am depraved not merely because of...

All this after less than five minutes sitting on a bench and look-

ing at the pretty building where he had once been dean.

But the mistake had been made. He was back. He was there. He

was back on the hill from which they had driven him, and so was
his contempt for the friends who hadn't rallied round him and the
colleagues who hadn't cared to support him and the enemies who'd
disposed so easily of the whole meaning of his professional career.
The urge to expose the capricious cruelty of their righteous idiocy
flooded him with rage. He was back on the hill in the bondage of
his rage and he could feel its intensity driving out all sense and de-
manding that he take immediate action.

Delphine Roux.

WHAT  DO  YOU  D O . . . ?

He got up and started for her office. At a certain age, he thought,

it is better for one's health not to do what I am about to do. At a
certain age, a man's outlook is best tempered by moderation, if
not resignation, if not outright capitulation. At a certain age, one
should live without either harking too much back to grievances
of the past or inviting resistance in the present by embodying a
challenge to the pieties that be. Yet to give up playing any but
the role socially assigned, in this instance assigned to the respect-
ably retired—at seventy-one, that is surely what is appropriate,
and so, for Coleman Silk, as he long ago demonstrated with requi-
site ruthlessness to his very own mother, that is what is unaccept-
able.

He was not an embittered anarchist like Iris's crazy father, Gittel-

man. He was not a firebrand or an agitator in any way. Nor was he a
madman. Nor was he a radical or a revolutionary, not even intellec-
tually or philosophically speaking, unless it is revolutionary to be-
lieve that disregarding prescriptive society's most restrictive demar-
cations and asserting independently a free personal choice that
is well within the law was something other than a basic human
right—unless it is revolutionary, when you've come of age, to refuse
to accept automatically the contract drawn up for your signature at
birth.

By now he had passed behind North Hall and was headed for the

long bowling green of a lawn leading to Barton and the office of
Delphine Roux. He had no idea what he was going to say should he
even catch her at her desk on a midsummer day as glorious as this
one, with the fall semester not scheduled to begin for another six or
seven weeks—nor did he find out, because, before he got anywhere
near the wide brick path encircling Barton, he noticed around at
the back of North Hall, gathered on a shady patch of grass adjacent
to a basement stairwell, a group of five college janitors, in custodial
staff shirts and trousers of UPS brown, sharing a pizza out of a
delivery box and heartily laughing at somebody's joke. The only
woman of the five and the focus of her coworkers' lunchtime atten-
tion—she who had told the joke or made the wisecrack or done

the teasing and who happened also to be laughing loudest—was
Faunia Farley.

The men appeared to be in their early thirties or thereabouts.

Two were bearded, and one of the bearded ones, sporting a long
ponytail, was particularly broad and oxlike. He was the only one up
on his feet, the better, it seemed, to hover directly over Faunia as she
sat on the ground, her long legs stretched out before her and her
head thrown back in the gaiety of the moment. Her hair was a sur-
prise to Coleman. It was down. In his experience, it was unfailingly
drawn tightly back through an elastic band—down only in bed
when she removed the band so as to allow it to fall to her unclothed
shoulders.

With the boys. These must be "the boys" she referred to. One

of them was recently divorced, a successless one-time garage me-
chanic who kept her Chevy running for her and drove her back and
forth from work on the days when the damn thing wouldn't start
no matter what he did, and one of them wanted to take her to a
porn film on the nights his wife was working the late shift at the
Blackwell paper box plant, and one of the boys was so innocent he
didn't know what a hermaphrodite was. When the boys came up in
conversation, Coleman listened without comment, expressing no
chagrin over what she had to say about them, however much he
wondered about their interest in her, given the meat of their talk
as Faunia reported it. But as she didn't go endlessly on about them,
and as he didn't encourage her with questions about them, the boys
didn't make the impression on Coleman that they would have had,
say, on Lester Farley. Of course she might herself choose to be a lit-
tle less carefree and feed herself less cooperatively into their fanta-
sies, but even when Coleman was impelled to suggest that, he easily
managed to restrain himself. She could speak as pointlessly or
pointedly as she liked to anyone, and whatever the consequences,
she would have to bear them. She was not his daughter. She was not
even his "girl." She was—what she was.

But watching unseen from where he had ducked back into the

shadowed wall of North Hall, it was not nearly so easy to take so

WHAT  DO  YOU   D O . . . ?

detached and tolerant a view. Because now he saw not only what
he invariably saw—what attaining so little in life had done to her—
but perhaps why so little had been attained; from his vantage point
no more than fifty feet away, he could observe almost microscopi-
cally how, without him to take her cues from, she took cues instead
from the gruffest example around, the coarsest, the one whose hu-
man expectations were the lowest and whose self-conception the
shallowest. Since, no matter how intelligent you may be, Voluptas
makes virtually anything you want to think come true, certain pos-
sibilities are never even framed, let alone vigorously conjectured,
and assessing correctly the qualities of your Voluptas is the last
thing you are equipped to do . . .  until, that is, you slip into the
shadows and observe her rolling onto her back on the grass, her
knees bent and falling slightly open, the cheese of the pizza running
down one hand, a Diet Coke brandished in the other, and laugh-
ing her head off—at what? at hermaphroditism?—while over her
looms, in the person of a failed grease monkey, everything that is
the antithesis of your own way of life. Another Farley? Another Les
Farley? Maybe nothing so ominous as that, but more of a substitute
for Farley than for him.

A campus scene that would have seemed without significance

had Coleman encountered it on a summer day back when he was
dean—as he undoubtedly had numerous times—a campus scene
that would have seemed back then not merely harmless but ap-
pealingly expressive of the pleasure to be derived from eating out
of doors on a beautiful day was freighted now with nothing but
significance. Where neither Nelson Primus nor his beloved Lisa
nor even the cryptic denunciation anonymously dispatched by
Delphine Roux had convinced him of anything, this scene of no
great moment on the lawn back of North Hall exposed to him at
last the underside of his own disgrace.

Lisa. Lisa and those kids of hers. Tiny little Carmen. That's who

came flashing into his thoughts, tiny Carmen, six years old but, in
Lisa's words, like a much younger kid. "She's cute," Lisa said, "but
she's like a baby." And adorably cute Carmen was when he saw her:

pale, pale brown skin, pitch-black hair in two stiff braids, eyes un-
like any he'd ever seen on another human being, eyes like coals blue
with heat and lit from within, a child's quick and flexible body, at-
tired neatly in miniaturized jeans and sneakers, wearing colorful
socks and a white tube of a T-shirt nearly as narrow as a pipe
cleaner—a frisky little girl seemingly attentive to everything, and
particularly to him. "This is my friend Coleman," Lisa said when
Carmen came strolling into the room, on her small, scrubbed first-
thing-in-the-morning face a slightly amused, self-important mock
smile. "Hello, Carmen," Coleman said. "He just wanted to see what
we do," Lisa explained. "Okay," said Carmen, agreeably enough, but
she studied him no less carefully than he was studying her, seem-
ingly with the smile. "We're just gonna do what we always do," said
Lisa. "Okay," Carmen said, but now she was trying out on him a
rather more serious version of the smile. And when she turned and
got to handling the movable plastic letters magnetized to the low
little blackboard and Lisa asked her to begin sliding them around to
make the words "want," "wet," "wash," and "wipe"—"I always tell
you," Lisa was saying, "that you have to look at the first letters.
Let's see you read the first letters. Read it with your finger"—
Carmen kept periodically swiveling her head, then her whole body,
to look at Coleman and stay in touch with him. "Anything is a dis-
traction," Lisa said softly to her father. "Come on, Miss Carmen.
Come on, honey. He's invisible." "What's that?" "Invisible," Lisa re-
peated, "you can't see him." Carmen laughed—"I can see him."
"Come on. Come on back to me. The first letters. That's it. Good
work. But you also have to read the rest of the word too. Right? The
first letter—and now the rest of the word. Good—'wash.' What's
this one? You know it. You know that one. 'Wipe.' Good." Twenty-
five weeks in the program on the day Coleman came to sit in
on Reading Recovery, and though Carmen had made progress, it
wasn't much. He remembered how she had struggled with the word
"your" in the illustrated storybook from which she was reading
aloud—scratching with her fingers around her eyes, squeezing and
balling up the midriff of her shirt, twisting her legs onto the rung of

WHAT  DO  YOU  D O . . . ?

her kiddie-sized chair, slowly but surely working her behind farther
and farther off the seat of the chair—and was still unable to recog-
nize "your" or to sound it out. "This is March, Dad. Twenty-five
weeks. It's a long time to be having trouble with 'your.' It's a long
time to be confusing 'couldn't' with 'climbed,' but at this point I'll
settle for 'your.' It's supposed to be twenty weeks in the program,
and out. She's been to kindergarten—she should have learned some
basic sight words. But when I showed her a list of words back in
September—and by then she was entering first grade—she said,
'What are these?' She didn't even know what words were. And the
letters: h she didn't know, j she didn't know, she confused u for c.
You see how she did that, it's visually similar, but she still has some-
thing of the problem twenty-five weeks later. The m and the w. The
i and the l. The g and the d. Still problems for her. It's all a problem
for her." "You're pretty dejected about Carmen," he said. "Well, ev-
ery day for half an hour? That's a lot of instruction. That's a lot of
work. She's supposed to read at home, but at home there's a six-
teen-year-old sister who just had a baby, and the parents forget or
don't care. The parents are immigrants, they're second-language
learners, they don't find it easy reading to their children in English,
though Carmen never got read to even in Spanish. And this is what
I deal with day in and day out. Just seeing if a child can manipulate
a book—I give it to them, a book like this one, with a big colorful il-
lustration beneath the title, and I say, 'Show me the front of the
book.' Some kids know, but most don't. Print doesn't mean any-
thing to them. And," she said, smiling with exhaustion and no-
where near as enticingly as Carmen, "my kids supposedly aren't
learning-disabled. Carmen doesn't look at the words while I'm
reading. She doesn't care. And that's why you're wiped out at the
end of the day. Other teachers have difficult tasks, I know, but at the
end of a day of Carmen after Carmen after Carmen, you come
home emotionally drained. By then I can't read. I can't even get on
the phone. I eat something and go to bed. I do like these kids. I love
these kids. But it's worse than draining—it's killing."

Faunia was sitting up on the grass now, downing the last of her

drink while one of the boys—the youngest, thinnest, most boyish-
looking of them, incongruously bearded at just the chin and wear-
ing, with his brown uniform, a red-checkered bandanna and what
looked like high-heeled cowboy boots—was collecting all the de-
bris from lunch and stuffing it into a trash sack, and the other three
were standing apart, out in the sunshine, each smoking a last ciga-
rette before returning to work.

Faunia was alone. And quiet now. Sitting there gravely with the

empty soda can and thinking what? About the two years of wait-
ressing down in Florida when she was sixteen and seventeen, about
the retired businessmen who used to come in for lunch without
their wives and ask her if she wouldn't like to live in a nice apart-
ment and have nice clothes and a nice new Pinto and charge ac-
counts at all the Bal Harbour clothing shops and at the jewelry
store and at the beauty parlor and in exchange do nothing more
than be a girlfriend a few nights a week and every once in a while
on weekends? Not one, two, three, but four such proposals in just
the first year. And then the proposition from the Cuban. She clears
a hundred bucks a john and no taxes. For a skinny blonde with big
tits, a tall, good-looking kid like her with hustle and ambition and
guts, got up in a miniskirt, a halter, and boots, a thousand bucks a
night would be nothing. A year, two, and, if by then she wants to,
she retires—she can afford to. "And you didn't do it?" Coleman
asked. "No. Uh-uh. But don't think I didn't think about it," she said.
"All the restaurant shit, those creepy people, the crazy cooks, a
menu I can't read, orders I can't write, keeping everything straight
in my head—it was no picnic. But if I can't read, I can count. I can
add. I can subtract. I can't read words but I know who Shakespeare
is. I know who Einstein is. I know who won the Civil War. I'm not
stupid. I'm just an illiterate. A fine distinction but there it is. Num-
bers are something else. Numbers, believe me, I know. Don't think I
didn't think it might not be a bad idea at all." But Coleman needed
no such instruction. Not only did he think that at seventeen she
thought being a hooker might be a good idea, he thought that it
was an idea that she had more than simply entertained.

WHAT   DO   YOU   DO . . . ?

"What do you do with the kid who can't read?" Lisa had asked

him in her despair. "It's the key to everything, so you have to do
something, but doing it is burning me out. Your second year is sup-
posed to be better. Your third year better than that. And this is my
fourth." "And it isn't better?" he asked. "It's hard. It's so hard. Each
year is harder. But if one-on-one tutoring doesn't work, what do
you do?" Well, what he did with the kid who couldn't read was to
make her his mistress. What Farley did was to make her his punch-
ing bag. What the Cuban did was to make her his whore, or one
among them—so Coleman believed more often than not. And for
how long his whore? Is that what Faunia was thinking about before
getting herself up to head back to North Hall to finish cleaning the
corridors? Was she thinking about how long it had all gone on? The
mother, the stepfather, the escape from the stepfather, the places in
the South, the places in the North, the men, the beatings, the jobs,
the marriage, the farm, the herd, the bankruptcy, the children, the
two dead children. No wonder half an hour in the sun sharing a
pizza with the boys is paradise to her.

"This is my friend Coleman, Faunia. He's just going to watch."
"Okay," Faunia says. She is wearing a green corduroy jumper,

fresh white stockings, and shiny black shoes, and is not nearly as
jaunty as Carmen—composed, well mannered, permanently a little
deflated, a pretty middle-class Caucasian child with long blond hair
in butterfly barrettes at either side and, unlike Carmen, showing no
interest in him, no curiosity about him, once he has been intro-
duced. "Hello," she mumbles meekly, and goes obediently back to
moving the magnetic letters around, pushing together the w's, the
t's, the n's, the s's, and, on another part of the blackboard, grouping
together all the vowels.

"Use two hands," Lisa tells her, and she does what she is told.
"Which are these?" Lisa asks.
And Faunia reads them. Gets all the letters right.
"Let's take something she knows," Lisa says to her father. "Make

'not,' Faunia."

Faunia does it. Faunia makes "not."

"Good work. Now something she doesn't know. Make 'got.'"
Looks long and hard at the letters, but nothing happens. Faunia

makes nothing. Does nothing. Waits. Waits for the next thing to
happen. Been waiting for the next thing to happen all her life. It al-
ways does.

"I want you to change the first part, Miss Faunia. Come on. You

know this. What's the first part of 'got'?"

"G." She moves away the n and, at the start of the word, substi-

tutes g.

"Good work. Now make it say 'pot.'"
She does it. Pot.
"Good. Now read it with your finger."
Faunia moves her finger beneath each letter while distinctly pro-

nouncing its sound. "Puh—ah—tuh."

"She's quick," Coleman says.
"Yes, but that's supposed to be quick."
There are three other children with three other Reading Recov-

ery teachers in other parts of the large room, and so all around him
Coleman can hear little voices reading aloud, rising and falling in
the same childish pattern regardless of the content, and he hears
the other teachers saying, "You know that—u, like 'umbrella'—u,
u—" and "You know that—ing, you know ing—" and "You know
I—good, good work," and when he looks around, he sees that all
the other children being taught are Faunia as well. There are alpha-
bet charts everywhere, with pictures of objects to illustrate each of
the letters, and there are plastic letters everywhere to pick up in
your hand, differently colored so as to help you phonetically form
the words a letter at a time, and piled everywhere are simple books
that tell the simplest stories: "... on Friday we went to the beach.
Saturday we went to the airport." "'Father Bear, is Baby Bear with
you?' 'No,' said Father Bear." "In the morning a dog barked at Sara.
She was frightened. 'Try to be a brave girl, Sara,' said Mom." In ad-
dition to all these books and all these stories and all these Saras and
all these dogs and all these bears and all these beaches, there are

four teachers, four teachers all for Faunia, and they still can't teach
her to read at her level.

"She's in first grade," Lisa is telling her father. "We're hoping that

if we all four work together with her all day long every day, by the
end of the year we can get her up to speed. But it's hard to get her
motivated on her own."

"Pretty little girl," Coleman says.
"Yes, you find her pretty? You like that type? Is that your type,

Dad, the pretty, slow-at-reading type with the long blond hair and
the broken will and the butterfly barrettes?"

"I didn't say that."
"You didn't have to. I've been watching you with her," and she

points around the room to where all four Faunias sit quietly before
the board, forming and reforming out of the colorful plastic letters
the words "pot" and "got" and "not." "The first time she spelled out
'pot' with her finger, you couldn't take your eyes off the kid. Well, if
that turns you on, you should have been here back in September.
Back in September she misspelled her first name and her second
name. Fresh from kindergarten and the only word on the word list
she could recognize was 'not.' She didn't understand that print
contains a message. She didn't know left page before right page.
She didn't know 'Goldilocks and the Three Bears.' 'Do you know
"Goldilocks and the Three Bears," Faunia?' 'No.' Which means that
her kindergarten experience—because that's what they get there,
fairy tales, nursery rhymes—wasn't very good. Today she knows
'Little Red Riding Hood,' but then? Forget it. Oh, if you'd met
Faunia last September, fresh from failing at kindergarten, I guaran-
tee you, Dad, she would have driven you wild."

What do you do with the kid who can't read? The kid who is

sucking somebody off in a pickup in her driveway while, upstairs,
in a tiny apartment over a garage, her small children are supposedly
asleep with a space heater burning—two untended children, a ker-
osene fire, and she's with this guy in his truck. The kid who has
been a runaway since age fourteen, on the lam from her inexplica-

ble life for her entire life. The kid who marries, for the stability and
the safeguard he'll provide, a combat-crazed veteran who goes for
your throat if you so much as turn in your sleep. The kid who is
false, the kid who hides herself and lies, the kid who can't read who
can read, who pretends she can't read, takes willingly upon herself
this crippling shortcoming all the better to impersonate a member
of a subspecies to which she does not belong and need not belong
but to which, for every wrong reason, she wants him to believe she
belongs. Wants herself to believe she belongs. The kid whose exis-
tence became a hallucination at seven and a catastrophe at fourteen
and a disaster after that, whose vocation is to be neither a waitress
nor a hooker nor a farmer nor a janitor but forever the stepdaugh-
ter to a lascivious stepfather and the undefended offspring of a self-
obsessed mother, the kid who mistrusts everyone, sees the con in
everyone, and yet is protected against nothing, whose capacity to
hold on, unintimidated, is enormous and yet whose purchase on
life is minute, misfortune's favorite embattled child, the kid to
whom everything loathsome that can happen has happened and
whose luck shows no sign of changing and yet who excites and
arouses him like nobody since Steena, not the most but, morally
speaking, the least repellent person he knows, the one to whom he
feels drawn because of having been aimed for so long in the oppo-
site direction—because of all he has missed by going in the opposite
direction—and because the underlying feeling of rightness that
controlled him formerly is exactly what is propelling him now, the
unlikely intimate with whom he shares no less a spiritual than a
physical union, who is anything but a plaything upon whom he
flings his body twice a week in order to sustain his animal nature,
who is more to him like a comrade-in-arms than anyone else on
earth.

And what do you do with such a kid? You find a pay phone as fast

as you can and rectify your idiotic mistake.

He thinks she is thinking about how long it has all gone on, the
mother, the stepfather, the escape from the stepfather, the places in

WHAT   DO  YOU   D O . . . ?

the South, the places in the North, the men, the beatings, the jobs,
the marriage, the farm, the herd, the bankruptcy, the children, the
dead children... and maybe she is. Maybe she is even if, alone now
on the grass while the boys are smoking and cleaning up from
lunch, she thinks she is thinking about crows. She thinks about
crows a lot of the time. They're everywhere. They roost in the
woods not far from the bed where she sleeps, they're in the pasture
when she's out there moving the fence for the cows, and today they
are cawing all over the campus, and so instead of thinking of what
she is thinking the way Coleman thinks she is thinking it, she is
thinking about the crow that used to hang around the store in
Seeley Falls when, after the fire and before moving to the farm, she
took the furnished room up there to try to hide from Farley, the
crow that hung around the parking lot between the post office and
the store, the crow that somebody had made into a pet because it
was abandoned or because its mother was killed—she never knew
what orphaned it. And now it had been abandoned for a second
time and had taken to hanging out in that parking lot, where most
everybody came and went during the course of the day. This crow
created many problems in Seeley Falls because it started dive-
bombing people coming into the post office, going after the bar-
rettes in the little girls' hair and so on—as crows will because it is
their nature to collect shiny things, bits of glass and stuff like that—
and so the postmistress, in consultation with a few interested
townsfolk, decided to take it to the Audubon Society, where it was
caged and only sometimes let out to fly; it couldn't be set free be-
cause in the wild a bird that likes to hang around a parking lot sim-
ply will not fit in. That crow's voice. She remembers it at all hours,
day or night, awake, sleeping, or insomniac. Had a strange voice.
Not like the voice of other crows probably because it hadn't been
raised with other crows. Right after the fire, I used to go and visit
that crow at the Audubon Society, and whenever the visit was over
and I would turn to leave, it would call me back with this voice. Yes,
in a cage, but being what it was, it was better off that way. There
were other birds in cages that people had brought in because they

THE HUMAN  STAIN

couldn't live in the wild anymore. There were a couple of little owls.
Speckled things that looked like toys. I used to visit the owls too.
And a pigeon hawk with a piercing cry. Nice birds. And then I
moved down here and, alone as I was, am, I have gotten to know
crows like never before. And them me. Their sense of humor. Is that
what it is? Maybe it's not a sense of humor. But to me it looks like it
is. The way they walk around. The way they tuck their heads. The
way they scream at me if I don't have bread for them. Faunia, go get
the bread. They strut. They boss the other birds around. On Satur-
day, after having the conversation with the redtail hawk down by
Cumberland, I came home and I heard these two crows back in the
orchards. I knew something was up. This alarming crow-calling.
Sure enough, saw three birds—two crows crowing and cawing off
this hawk. Maybe the very one I'd been talking to a few minutes be-
fore. Chasing it. Obviously the redtail was up to no good. But tak-
ing on a hawk? Is that a good idea? It wins them points with the
other crows, but I don't know if I would do that. Can even two of
them take on a hawk? Aggressive bastards. Mostly hostile. Good for
them. Saw a photo once—a crow going right up to an eagle and
barking at it. The eagle doesn't give a shit. Doesn't even see him. But
the crow is something. The way it flies. They're not as pretty as ra-
vens when ravens fly and do those wonderful, beautiful acrobatics.
They've got a big fuselage to get off the ground and yet they don't
need a running start necessarily. A few steps will do it. I've watched
that. It's more just a huge effort. They make this huge effort and
they're up. When I used to take the kids to eat at Friendly's. Four
years ago. There were millions of them. The Friendly's on East
Main Street in Blackwell. In the late afternoon. Before dark. Mil-
lions of them in the parking lot. The crow convention at Friendly's.
What is it with crows and parking lots? What is that all about? We'll
never know what that's about or anything else. Other birds are kind
of dull next to crows. Yes, bluejays have that terrific bounce. The
trampoline walk. That's good. But crows can do the bounce and the
chesty thrust. Most impressive. Turning their heads from left to
right, casing the joint. Oh, they're hot shit. They're the coolest. The

WHAT  DO  YOU   DO. . .?

caw. The noisy caw. Listen. Just listen. Oh, I love it. Staying in touch
like that. The frantic call that means danger. I love that. Rush out-
side then. It can be 5 A.M., I don't care. The frantic call, rush outside,
and you can expect the show to begin any minute. The other calls, I
can't say I know what they mean. Maybe nothing. Sometimes it's a
quick call. Sometimes it's throaty. Don't want to confuse it with the
raven's call. Crows mate with crows and ravens with ravens. It's
wonderful that they never get confused. Not to my knowledge any-
way. Everybody who says they're ugly scavenger birds—and most
everybody does—is nuts. I think they're beautiful. Oh, yes. Very
beautiful. Their sleekness. Their shades. It's so so black in there you
can see purple in there. Their heads. At the start of the beak that
sprout of hairs, that mustache thing, those hairs coming forward
from the feathers. Probably has a name. But the name doesn't mat-
ter. Never does. All that matters is that it's there. And nobody
knows why. It's like everything else—just there. All their eyes are
black. Everybody gets black eyes. Black claws. What is it like flying?
Ravens will do the soaring, crows just seem to go where they're go-
ing. They don't just fly around as far as I can tell. Let the ravens
soar. Let the ravens do the soaring. Let the ravens pile up the miles
and break the records and get the prizes. The crows have to get
from one place to another. They hear that I have bread, so they're
here. They hear somebody down the road two miles has bread, so
they're there. When I throw their bread out to them, there'll always
be one who is the guard and another you can hear off in the dis-
tance, and they're signaling back and forth just to let everybody
know what's going on. It's hard to believe in everybody's looking
out for everybody else, but that's what it looks like. There's a won-
derful story I never forgot that a friend of mine told me when I was
a kid that her mother told her. There were these crows who were so
smart that they had figured out how to take these nuts they had that
they couldn't break open out to the highway, and they would watch
the lights, the traffic lights, and they would know when the cars
would take off—they were that intelligent that they knew what was
going on with the lights—and they would place the nuts right in

front of the tires so they'd be cracked open and as soon as the light
would change they'd move down. I believed that back then. Be-
lieved everything back then. And now that I know them and no-
body else, I believe it again. Me and the crows. That's the ticket.
Stick to the crows and you've got it made. I hear they preen each
other's feathers. Never seen that. Seen them close together and
wonder what they're doing. But never seen them actually doing it.
Don't even see them preen their own. But then, I'm next door to the
roost, not in it. Wish I were. Would have preferred to be one. Oh,
yes, absolutely. No two ways about that. Much prefer to be a crow.
They don't have to worry about moving to get away from anybody
or anything. They just move. They don't have to pack anything.
They just go. When they get smashed by something, that's it, it's
over. Tear a wing, it's over. Break a foot, it's over. A much better way
than this. Maybe I'll come back as one. What was I before that I
came back as this? I was a crow! Yes! I was one! And I said, "God, I
wish I was that big-titted girl down there," and I got my wish, and
now, Christ, do I want to go back to my crow status. My status crow.
Good name for a crow. Status. Good name for anything black and
big. Goes with the strut. Status. I noticed everything as a kid. I loved
birds. Always stuck on crows and hawks and owls. Still see the owls
at night, driving home from Coleman's place. I can't help it if I get
out of the car to talk to them. Shouldn't. Should drive straight on
home before that bastard kills me. What do crows think when they
hear the other birds singing? They think it's stupid. It is. Cawing.
That's the only thing. It doesn't look good for a bird that struts to
sing a sweet little song. No, caw your head off. That's the fucking
ticket—cawing your head off and frightened of nothing and in
there eating everything that's dead. Gotta get a lot of road kill in a
day if you want to fly like that. Don't bother to drag it off but eat it
right on the road. Wait until the last minute when a car is coming,
and then they get up and go but not so far that they can't hop right
back and dig back in soon as it's passed. Eating in the middle of the
road. Wonder what happens when the meat goes bad. Maybe it

doesn't for them. Maybe that's what it means to be a scavenger.
Them and the turkey vultures—that's their job. They take care of
all of those things out in the woods and out in the road that we
don't want anything to do with. No crow goes hungry in all this
world. Never without a meal. If it rots, you don't see the crow run
away. If there's death, they're there. Something's dead, they come by
and get it. I like that. I like that a lot. Eat that raccoon no matter
what. Wait for the truck to come crack open the spine and then go
back in there and suck up all the good stuff it takes to lift that beau-
tiful black carcass off the ground. Sure, they have their strange be-
havior. Like anything else. I've seen them up in those trees, gathered
all together, talking all together, and something's going on. But what
it is I'll never know. There's some powerful arrangement there. But
I haven't the faintest idea whether they know what it is themselves.
It could be as meaningless as everything else. I'll bet it isn't, though,
and that it makes a million fucking times more sense than any
fucking thing down here. Or doesn't it? Is it just a lot of stuff that
looks like something else but isn't? Maybe it's all just a genetic tic.
Or tock. Imagine if the crows were in charge. Would it be the same
shit all over again? The thing about them is that they're all practi-
cality. In their flight. In their talk. Even in their color. All that black-
ness. Nothing but blackness. Maybe I was one and maybe I wasn't. I
think I sometimes believe that I already am one. Yes, been believing
that on and off for months now. Why not? There are men who are
locked up in women's bodies and women who are locked up in
men's bodies, so why can't I be a crow locked up in this body? Yeah,
and where is the doctor who is going to do what they do to let me
out? Where do I go to get the surgery that will let me be what I am?
Who do I talk to? Where do I go and what do I do and how the fuck
do I get out?

I am a crow. I know it. I know it!

At the student union building, midway down the hill from North
Hall, Coleman found a pay phone in the corridor across from the

cafeteria where the Elderhostel students were having their lunch.
He could see inside, through the double doorway, to the long din-
ing tables where the couples were all mingling happily at lunch.

Jeff wasn't at home—it was about 10 A.M. in L.A., and Coleman

got the answering machine, and so he searched his address book for
the office number at the university, praying that Jeff wasn't off in
class yet. What the father had to say to his eldest son had to be said
immediately. The last time he'd called Jeff in a state anything like
this was to tell him that Iris had died. "They killed her. They set out
to kill me and they killed her." It was what he said to everyone, and
not just in those first twenty-four hours. That was the beginning of
the disintegration: everything requisitioned by rage. But this is the
end of it. The end—there was the news he had for his son. And for
himself. The end of the expulsion from the previous life. To be con-
tent with something less grandiose than self-banishment and the
overwhelming challenge that is to one's strength. To live with one's
failure in a modest fashion, organized once again as a rational be-
ing and blotting out the blight and the indignation. If unyielding,
unyielding quietly. Peacefully. Dignified contemplation—that's the
ticket, as Faunia liked to say. To live in a way that does not bring
Philoctetes to mind. He does not have to live like a tragic charac-
ter in his course. That the primal seems a solution is not news—
it always does. Everything changes with desire. The answer to all
that has been destroyed. But choosing to prolong the scandal by
perpetuating the protest? My stupidity everywhere. My derange-
ment everywhere. And the grossest sentimentality. Wistfully re-
membering back to Steena. Jokingly dancing with Nathan Zucker-
man. Confiding in him. Reminiscing with him. Letting him listen.
Sharpening the writer's sense of reality. Feeding that great opportu-
nistic maw, a novelist's mind. Whatever catastrophe turns up, he
transforms into writing. Catastrophe is cannon fodder for him.
But what can I transform this into? I am stuck with it. As is. Sans
language, shape, structure, meaning—sans the unities, the cathar-
sis, sans everything. More of the untransformed unforeseen. And
why would anyone want more? Yet the woman who is Faunia is

WHAT   DO   YOU   D O . . . ?

the unforeseen. Intertwined orgasmically with the unforeseen, and
convention unendurable. Upright principles unendurable. Contact
with her body the only principle. Nothing more important than
that. And the stamina of her sneer. Alien to the core. Contact with
that. The obligation to subject my life to hers and its vagaries. Its
vagrancy. Its truancy. Its strangeness. The delectation of this ele-
mental eros. Take the hammer of Faunia to everything outlived, all
the exalted justifications, and smash your way to freedom. Freedom
from? From the stupid glory of being right. From the ridiculous
quest for significance. From the never-ending campaign for legiti-
macy. The onslaught of freedom at seventy-one, the freedom to
leave a lifetime behind—known also as Aschenbachian madness.
"And before nightfall"—the final words of Death in Venice—"a
shocked and respectful world received the news of his decease." No,
he does not have to live like a tragic character in any course.

"Jeff! It's Dad. It's your father."
"Hi. How's it going?"
"Jeff, I know why I haven't heard from you, why I haven't heard

from Michael. Mark I wouldn't expect to hear from—and Lisa
hung up on me last time I called."

"She phoned me. She told me."
"Listen, Jeff—my affair with this woman is over."
"Is it? How come?"
He thinks, Because there's no hope for her. Because men have

beaten the shit out of her. Because her kids have been killed in a fire.
Because she works as a janitor. Because she has no education and
says she can't read. Because she's been on the run since she's four-
teen. Because she doesn't even ask me, "What are you doing with
me?" Because she knows what everybody is doing with her. Because
she's seen it all and there's no hope.

But all he says to his son is, "Because I don't want to lose my chil-

dren."

With the gentlest laugh, Jeff said, "Try as you might, you couldn't

do it. You certainly aren't able to lose me. I don't believe you were
going to lose Mike or Lisa, either. Markie is something else. Markie

THE HUMAN STAIN

yearns for something none of us can give him. Not just you—none
of us. It's all very sad with Markie. But that we were losing you?
That we've been losing you since Mother died and you resigned
from the college? That is something we've all been living with. Dad,
nobody has known what to do. Since you went on the warpath with
the college, it hasn't been easy to get to you."

"I realize that," said Coleman, "I understand that," but two min-

utes into the conversation and it was already insufferable to him.
His reasonable, supercompetent, easygoing son, the eldest, the
coolest head of the lot, speaking calmly about the family problem
with the father who was the problem was as awful to endure as his
irrational youngest son being enraged with him and going nuts.
The excessive demand he had made on their sympathy—on the
sympathy of his own children! "I understand," Coleman said again,
and that he understood made it all the worse.

"I hope nothing too awful happened with her," Jeff said.
"With her? No. I just decided that enough was enough." He was

afraid to say more for fear that he might start to say something very
different.

"That's good," Jeff said. "I'm terrifically relieved. That there've

been no repercussions, if that's what you're saying. That's just
great."

Repercussions?
"I don't follow you," Coleman said. "Why repercussions?"
"You're free and clear? You're yourself again? You sound more

like yourself than you have for years. That you've called—this is all
that matters. I was waiting and I was hoping and now you've called.
There's nothing more to be said. You're back. That's all we were
worried about."

"I'm lost, Jeff. Fill me in. I'm lost as to what we're going on about

here. Repercussions from what?"

Jeff paused before he spoke again, and when he did speak, it was

reluctantly. "The abortion. The suicide attempt."

"Faunia?"
"Right."

"Had an abortion? Tried to commit suicide? When?"
"Dad, everyone in Athena knew. That's how it got to us."
"Everyone? Who is everyone?"
"Look, Dad, there are no repercussions—"
"It never happened, my boy, that's why there are no 'repercus-

sions.' It never happened. There was no abortion, there was no sui-
cide attempt—not that I know of. And not that she knows of. But
just who is this everyone? Goddamnit, you hear a story like that, a
senseless story like that, why don't you pick up the phone, why
don't you come to me?"

"Because it isn't my business to come to you. I don't come to a

man your age—"

"No, you don't, do you? Instead, whatever you're told about a

man my age, however ludicrous, however malicious and absurd,
you believe."

"If I made a mistake, I am truly sorry. You're right. Of course

you're right. But it's been a long haul for all of us. You've not been
that easy to reach now for—"

"Who told this to you?"
"Lisa. Lisa heard it first."
"Who did Lisa hear it from?"
"Several sources. People. Friends."
"I want names. I want to know who this everyone is. Which

friends?"

"Old friends. Athena friends."
"Her darling childhood friends. The offspring of my colleagues.

Who told them, I wonder."

"There was no suicide attempt," Jeff said.
"No, Jeffrey, there wasn't. No abortion that I know of, either."
"Well, fine."
"And if there were? If I had impregnated this woman and she'd

gone for an abortion and after the abortion had attempted suicide?
Suppose, Jeff, she had even succeeded at suicide. Then what? Then
what, Jeff? Your father's mistress kills herself. Then what? Turn on
your father? Your criminal father? No, no, no—let's go back, back

THE HUMAN STAIN

up a step, back up to the suicide attempt. Oh, I like that. I do won-
der who came up with the suicide attempt. Is it because of the abor-
tion that she attempts this suicide? Let's get straight this melo-
drama that Lisa got from her Athena friends. Because she doesn't
want the abortion? Because the abortion is imposed on her? I see. I
see the cruelty. A mother who has lost two little children in a fire
turns up pregnant by her lover. Ecstasy. A new life. Another chance.
A new child to replace the dead ones. But the lover—no, says he,
and drags her by her hair to the abortionist, and then—of course—
having worked his will on her, takes the naked, bleeding body—"
By this time Jeff had hung up.

But by this time Coleman didn't need Jeff to keep on going. He

had only to see the Elderhostel couples inside the cafeteria finishing
their coffee before returning to class, he had only to hear them in
there at their ease and enjoying themselves, the appropriate elderly
looking as they should look and sounding as they should sound, for
him to think that even the conventional things that he'd done af-
forded him no relief. Not just having been a professor, not just hav-
ing been a dean, not just having remained married, through every-
thing, to the same formidable woman, but having a family, having
intelligent children—and it all afforded him nothing. If anybody's
children should be able to understand this, shouldn't his? All the
preschool. All the reading to them. The sets of encyclopedias. The
preparation before quizzes. The dialogues at dinner. The endless
instruction, from Iris, from him, in the multiform nature of life.
The scrutinization of language. All this stuff we did, and then to
come back at me with this mentality? After all the schooling and all
the books and all the words and all the superior SAT scores, it is in-
supportable. After all the taking them seriously. When they said
something foolish, engaging it seriously. All the attention paid to
the development of reason and of mind and of imaginative sympa-
thy. And of skepticism, of well-informed skepticism. Of thinking
for oneself. And then to absorb the first rumor? All the education
and nothing helps. Nothing can insulate against the lowest level of

thought. Not even to ask themselves, "But does that sound like our
father? Does that sound like him to me?" Instead, your father is
an open-and-shut case. Never allowed to watch TV and you mani-
fest the mentality of a soap opera. Allowed to read nothing but
the Greeks or their equivalent and you make life into a Victorian
soap opera. Answering your questions. Your every question. Never
turning one aside. You ask about your grandparents, you ask who
they were and I told you. They died, your grandparents, when I was
young. Grandpa when I was in high school, Grandma when I was
away in the navy. By the time I got back from the war, the landlord
had long ago put everything out on the street. There was nothing
left. The landlord told me he couldn't afford to blah blah, there was
no rent coming in, and I could have killed the son of a bitch. Photo
albums. Letters. Stuff from my childhood, from their childhood, all
of it, everything, the whole thing, gone. "Where were they born?
Where did they live?" They were born in Jersey. The first of their
families born here. He was a saloon keeper. I believe that in Russia
his father, your great-grandfather, worked in the tavern business.
Sold booze to the Russkies. "Do we have aunts and uncles?" My fa-
ther had a brother who went to California when I was a little kid,
and my mother was an only child, like me. After me she couldn't
have children—I never knew why that was. The brother, my father's
older brother, remained a Silberzweig—he never took the changed
name as far as I know. Jack Silberzweig. Born in the old country
and so kept the name. When I was shipping out from San Fran-
cisco, I looked in all the California phone books to try to locate
him. He was on the outs with my father. My father considered him
a lazy bum, wanted nothing to do with him, and so nobody was
sure what city Uncle Jack lived in. I looked in all the phone books.
I was going to tell him that his brother had died. I wanted to
meet him. My one living relative on that side. So what if he's a
bum? I wanted to meet his children, my cousins, if there were any.
I looked under Silberzweig. I looked under Silk. I looked under
Silber. Maybe in California he'd become a Silber. I didn't know. And

THE   HUMAN   STAIN

I don't know. I have no idea. And then I stopped looking. When you
don't have a family of your own, you concern yourself with these
things. Then I had you and I stopped worrying about having an un-
cle and having cousins ... Each kid heard the same thing. And the
only one it didn't satisfy was Mark. The older boys didn't ask that
much, but the twins were insistent. "Were there any twins in the
past?" My understanding—I believe I was told this—was that there
was either a great- or a great-great-grandfather who was a twin.
This was the story he told Iris as well. All of it was invented for Iris.
This was the story he told her on Sullivan Street when they first met
and the story he stuck to, the original boilerplate. And the only one
never satisfied was Mark. "Where did our great-grandparents come
from?" Russia. "But what city?" I asked my father and mother, but
they never seemed to know for sure. One time it was one place, one
time another. There was a whole generation of Jews like that. They
never really knew. The old people didn't talk about it much, and the
American children weren't that curious, they were het up on being
Americans, and so, in my family as in many families, there was a
general Jewish geographical amnesia. All I got when I asked,
Coleman told them, was the answer "Russia." But Markie said,
"Russia is gigantic, Dad. Where in Russia?" Markie would not be
still. And why? Why? There was no answer. Markie wanted the
knowledge of who they were and where they came from—all that
his father could never give him. And that's why he becomes the Or-
thodox Jew? That's why he writes the biblical protest poems? That's
why Markie hates him so? Impossible. There were the Gittelmans.
Gittelman grandparents. Gittelman aunts and uncles. Little Gittel-
man cousins all over Jersey. Wasn't that enough? How many rela-
tives did he need? There had to be Silks and Silberzweigs too? That
made no sense at all as a grievance—it could not be! Yet Coleman
wondered anyway, irrational as it might be to associate Markie's
brooding anger with his own secret. So long as Markie was at odds
with him, he was never able to stop himself from wondering, and
never more agonizingly than after Jeff had hung up the phone on

WHAT   DO   YOU   DO . . . I

him. If the children who carried his origins in their genes and who
would pass those origins on to their own children could find it so
easy to suspect him of the worst kind of cruelty to Faunia, what ex-
planation could there be? Because he could never tell them about
their family? Because he'd owed it to them to tell them? Because to
deny them such knowledge was wrong? That made no sense! Retri-
bution was not unconsciously or unknowingly enacted. There was
no such quid pro quo. It could not be. And yet, after the phone
call—leaving the student union, leaving the campus, all the while
he was driving in tears back up the mountain—that was exactly
what it felt like.

And all the while he was driving home he was remembering the

time he'd almost told Iris. It was after the twins were born. The
family was now complete. They'd done it—he'd made it. With not
a sign of his secret on any of his kids, it was as though he had
been delivered from his secret. The exuberance that came of having
pulled it off brought him to the very brink of giving the whole
thing away. Yes, he would present his wife with the greatest gift he
possessed: he would tell the mother of his four children who their
father really was. He would tell Iris the truth. That was how excited
and relieved he was, how solid the earth felt beneath his feet after
she had their beautiful twins, and he took Jeff and Mikey to the
hospital to see their new brother and sister, and the most frighten-
ing apprehension of them all had been eradicated from his life.

But he never did give Iris that gift. He was saved from doing it—

or damned to leave it undone—because of the cataclysm that be-
fell a dear friend of hers, her closest associate on the art associa-
tion board, a pretty, refined amateur watercolorist named Claudia
McChesney, whose husband, owner of the county's biggest build-
ing firm, turned out to have quite a stunning secret of his own: a
second family. For some eight years, Harvey McChesney had been
keeping a woman years younger than Claudia, a bookkeeper at a
chair factory over near the Taconic by whom he'd had two children,
little kids aged four and six, living in a small town just across the

Massachusetts line in New York State, whom he visited each week,
whom he supported, whom he seemed to love, and whom nobody
in the McChesneys' Athena household knew anything about until
an anonymous phone call—probably from one of Harvey's build-
ing-trade rivals—revealed to Claudia and the three adolescent chil-
dren just what McChesney was up to when he wasn't out on the job.
Claudia collapsed that night, came completely apart and tried to
slash her wrists, and it was Iris who, beginning at 3 A.M., with the
help of a psychiatrist friend, organized the rescue operation that
got Claudia installed before dawn in Austin Riggs, the Stockbridge
psychiatric hospital. And it was Iris who, all the while she was nurs-
ing two newborns and mothering two preschool boys, visited the
hospital every day, talking to Claudia, steadying her, reassuring her,
bringing her potted plants to tend and art books to look at, even
combing and braiding Claudia's hair, until, after five weeks—and as
much a result of Iris's devotion as of the psychiatric program—
Claudia returned home to begin to take the steps necessary to rid
herself of the man who had caused all her misery.

In just days, Iris had got Claudia the name of a divorce lawyer

up in Pittsfield and, with all the Silk kids, including the infants,
strapped down in the back of the station wagon, she drove her
friend to the lawyer's office to be absolutely certain that the separa-
tion arrangements were initiated and Claudia's deliverance from
McChesney was under way. On the ride home that day, there'd been
a lot of bucking up to do, but bucking people up was Iris's specialty,
and she saw to it that Claudia's determination to right her life was
not washed away by her residual fears.

"What a wretched thing to do to another person," Iris said. "Not

the girlfriend. Bad enough, but that happens. And not the little
children, not even that—not even the other woman's little boy and
girl, painful and brutal as that would be for any wife to discover.
No, it's the secret—that's what did it, Coleman. That's why Claudia
doesn't want to go on living. 'Where's the intimacy?' That's what
gets her crying every time. 'Where is the intimacy,' she says, 'when

there is such a secret?' That he could hide this from her, that he
would have gone on hiding it from her—that's what Claudia's de-
fenseless against, and that's why she still wants to do herself in.
She says to me, 'It's like discovering a corpse. Three corpses. Three
human bodies hidden under our floor.'" "Yes," Coleman said,
"it's like something out of the Greeks. Out of The Bacchae"
"Worse," Iris said, "because it's not out of The Bacchae. It's out of
Claudia's life."

When, after almost a year of outpatient therapy, Claudia had a

rapprochement with her husband and he moved back into the
Athena house and the McChesneys resumed life together as a fam-
ily—when Harvey agreed to give up the other woman, if not his
other children, to whom he swore to remain a responsible father—
Claudia seemed no more eager than Iris to keep their friendship
alive, and after Claudia resigned from the art association, the
women no longer saw each other socially or at any of the organiza-
tion meetings where Iris was generally kingpin.

Nor did Coleman go ahead—as his triumph dictated when the

twins were born—to tell his wife his stunning secret. Saved, he
thought, from the most childishly sentimental stunt he could ever
have perpetrated. Suddenly to have begun to think the way a fool
thinks: suddenly to think the best of everything and everyone, to
shed entirely one's mistrust, one's caution, one's self-mistrust, to
think that all one's difficulties have come to an end, that all compli-
cations have ceased to be, to forget not only where one is but how
one has got there, to surrender the diligence, the discipline, the tak-
ing the measure of every last situation . . .  As though the battle
that is each person's singular battle could somehow be abjured, as
though voluntarily one could pick up and leave off being one's self,
the characteristic, the immutable self in whose behalf the battle is
undertaken in the first place. The last of his children having been
born perfectly white had all but driven him to taking what was
strongest in him and wisest in him and tearing it to bits. Saved he
was by the wisdom that says, "Don't do anything."

But even earlier, after the birth of their first child, he had done

something almost equally stupid and sentimental. He was a young
classics professor from Adelphi down at the University of Pennsyl-
vania for a three-day conference on The Iliad; he had given a paper,
he had made some contacts, he'd even been quietly invited by a re-
nowned classicist to apply for a position opening at Princeton,
and, on the way home, thinking himself at the pinnacle of exis-
tence, instead of heading north on the Jersey Turnpike, to get to
Long Island, he had very nearly turned south and made his way
down along the back roads of Salem and Cumberland counties to
Gouldtown, to his mother's ancestral home where they used to
hold the annual family picnic when he was a boy. Yes, then as well,
having become a father, he was going to try to give himself the easy
pleasure of one of those meaningful feelings that people will go in
search of whenever they cease to think. But because he had a son
didn't require him to turn south to Gouldtown any more than on
that same journey, when he reached north Jersey, his having had
this son required him to take the Newark exit and head toward East
Orange. There was yet another impulse to be suppressed: the im-
pulse he felt to see his mother, to tell her what had happened and to
bring her the boy. The impulse, two years after jettisoning her, and
despite Walter's warning, to show himself to his mother. No. Abso-
lutely not. And instead he continued straight on home to his white
wife and his white child.

And, some four decades later, all the while he was driving home
from the college, besieged by recrimination, remembering some of
the best moments of his life—the birth of his children, the exhilara-
tion, the all-too-innocent excitement, the wild wavering of his re-
solve, the relief so great that it nearly undid his resolve—he was re-
membering also the worst night of his life, remembering back to
his navy stint and the night he was thrown out of that Norfolk
whorehouse, the famous white whorehouse called Oris's. "You're a
black nigger, ain't you, boy?" and seconds later the bouncers had

hurled him from the open front door, over the stairs to the sidewalk
and into the street. The place he was looking for was Lulu's, over
on Warwick Avenue—Lulu's, they shouted after him, was where his
black ass belonged. His forehead struck the pavement, and yet he
got himself up, ran until he saw an alleyway, and there cut away
from the street and the Shore Patrol, who were all over the place
on a Saturday, swinging their billy clubs. He wound up in the toilet
of the only bar he dared to enter looking as battered as he did—a
colored bar just a few hundred feet from Hampton Roads and the
Newport News ferry (the ferry conveying the sailors to Lulu's) and
some ten blocks from Oris's. It was his first colored bar since he was
an East Orange schoolkid, back when he and a friend used to run
the football pools out of Billy's Twilight Club down on the Newark
line. During his first two years of high school, on top of the sur-
reptitious boxing, he would be in and out of Billy's Twilight all
through the fall, and it was there that he'd garnered the barroom
lore he claimed to have learned—as an East Orange white kid—in a
tavern owned by his Jewish old man.

He was remembering how he'd struggled to stanch his cut face

and how he'd swabbed vainly away at his white jumper but how the
blood dripped steadily down to spatter everything. The seatless
bowl was coated with shit, the soggy plank floor awash with piss,
the sink, if that thing was a sink, a swillish trough of sputum and
puke—so that when the retching began because of the pain in his
wrist, he threw up onto the wall he was facing rather than lower his
face into all that filth.

It was a hideous, raucous dive, the worst, like no place he had

ever seen, the most abominable he could have imagined, but he had
to hide somewhere, and so, on a bench as far as he could get from
the human wreckage swarming the bar, and in the clutches of all his
fears, he tried to sip at a beer, to steady himself and dim the pain
and to avoid drawing attention. Not that anyone at the bar had
bothered looking his way after he'd bought the beer and disap-
peared against the wall back of the empty tables: just as at the white

cathouse, nobody took him here for anything other than what
he was.

He still knew, with the second beer, that he was where he should

not be, yet if the Shore Patrol picked him up, if they discovered why
he'd been thrown out of Oris's, he was ruined: a court-martial, a
conviction, a long stretch at hard labor followed by a dishonorable
discharge—and all for having lied to the navy about his race, all for
having been stupid enough to step through a door where the only
out-and-out Negroes on the premises were either laundering the
linens or mopping up the slops.

This was it. He'd serve out his stint, do his time as a white man,

and this would be it. Because I can't pull it off, he thought—I don't
even want to. He'd never before known real disgrace. He'd never
before known what it was to hide from the police. Never before had
he bled from taking a blow—in all those rounds of amateur boxing
he had not lost a drop of blood or been hurt or damaged in any
way. But now the jumper of his whites was as red as a surgical dress-
ing, his pants were soggy with caking blood and, from where he'd
landed on his knees in the gutter, they were torn and dark with
grime. And his wrist had been injured, maybe even shattered, from
when he'd broken the fall with his hand—he couldn't move it or
bear to touch it. He drank off the beer and then got another in or-
der to try to deaden the pain.

This was what came of failing to fulfill his father's ideals, of flout-

ing his father's commands, of deserting his dead father altogether.
If only he'd done as his father had, as Walter had, everything would
be happening another way. But first he had broken the law by lying
to get into the navy, and now, out looking for a white woman to
fuck, he had plunged into the worst possible disaster. "Let me get
through to my discharge. Let me get out. Then I'll never lie again.
Just let me finish my time, and that's it!" It was the first he'd spoken
to his father since he'd dropped dead in the dining car.

If he kept this up, his life would amount to nothing. How did

Coleman know that? Because his father was speaking back to him

WHAT  DO  YOU  DO. . . ?

—the old admonishing authority rumbling up once again from his
father's chest, resonant as always with the unequivocal legitimacy
of an upright man. If Coleman kept on like this, he'd end up in a
ditch with his throat slit. Look at where he was now. Look where he
had come to hide. And how? Why? Because of his credo, because of
his insolent, arrogant "I am not one of you, I can't bear you, I am
not part of your Negro we" credo. The great heroic struggle against
their we—and look at what he now looked like! The passionate
struggle for precious singularity, his revolt of one against the Negro
fate—and just look where the defiant great one had ended up! Is
this where you've come, Coleman, to seek the deeper meaning of
existence? A world of love, that's what you had, and instead you for-
sake it for this! The tragic, reckless thing that you've done! And not
just to yourself—to us all. To Ernestine. To Walt. To Mother. To me.
To me in my grave. To my father in his. What else grandiose are you
planning, Coleman Brutus? Whom next are you going to mislead
and betray?

Still, he couldn't leave for the street because of his fear of the

Shore Patrol, and of the court-martial, and of the brig, and of the
dishonorable discharge that would hound him forever. Everything
in him was too stirred up for him to do anything but keep on
drinking until, of course, he was joined on the bench by a prostitute
who was openly of his own race.

When the Shore Patrol found him in the morning, they attrib-

uted the bloody wounds and the broken wrist and the befouled,
disheveled uniform to his having spent a night in niggertown,
another swingin' white dick hot for black poon who—having got
himself reamed, steamed, and dry-cleaned (as well as properly tat-
tooed in the bargain)—had been deposited for the scavengers to
pick over in that glass-strewn lot back of the ferry slip.

"U.S. Navy" is all the tattoo said, the words, no more than a quar-

ter inch high, inscribed in blue pigment between the blue arms of a
blue anchor, itself a couple inches long. A most unostentatious de-
sign as military tattoos go and, discreetly positioned just below the

joining of the right arm to the shoulder, a tattoo certainly easy
enough to hide. But when he remembered how he'd got it, it was
the mark evocative not only of the turbulence of the worst night of
his life but of all that underlay the turbulence—it was the sign of
the whole of his history, of the indivisibility of the heroism and the
disgrace. Embedded in that blue tattoo was a true and total image
of himself. The ineradicable biography was there, as was the proto-
type of the ineradicable, a tattoo being the very emblem of what
cannot ever be removed. The enormous enterprise was also there.
The outside forces were there. The whole chain of the unforeseen,
all the dangers of exposure and all the dangers of concealment—
even the senselessness of life was there in that stupid little blue
tattoo.

His difficulties with Delphine Roux had begun the first semester he
was back in the classroom, when one of his students who happened
to be a favorite of Professor Roux's went to her, as department
chair, to complain about the Euripides plays in Coleman's Greek
tragedy course. One play was Hippolytus, the other Alcestis; the stu-
dent, Elena Mitnick, found them "degrading to women."

"So what shall I do to accommodate Miss Mitnick? Strike Euripi-

des from my reading list?"

pides."

"And what," he asked, "is the prescribed method these days?"

thinking even as he spoke that this was not a debate for which he
had the patience or the civility. Besides, confounding Delphine
Roux was easier without engaging in the debate. Brimming though
she was with intellectual self-importance, she was twenty-nine
years old and virtually without experience outside schools, new to
her job and relatively new both to the college and to the country.
He understood from their previous encounters that her attempt to
appear to be not merely his superior but a supercilious superior—
"Clearly everything depends" and so on—was best repulsed by dis-

playing complete indifference to her judgment. For all that she
could not bear him, she also couldn't bear that the academic cre-
dentials that so impressed other of her Athena colleagues hadn't yet
overwhelmed the ex-dean. Despite herself, she could not escape
from being intimidated by the man who, five years earlier, had re-
luctantly hired her fresh from the Yale graduate school and who, af-
terward, never denied regretting it, especially when the psychologi-
cal numbskulls in his department settled on so deeply confused a
young woman as their chair.

To this day, she continued to be disquieted by Coleman Silk's

presence just to the degree that she wished for him now to be un-
settled by her. Something about him always led her back to her
childhood and the precocious child's fear that she is being seen
through; also to the precocious child's fear that she is not being
seen enough. Afraid of being exposed, dying to be seen—there's a
dilemma for you. Something about him made her even second-
guess her English, with which otherwise she felt wholly at ease.
Whenever they were face to face, something made her think that he
wanted nothing more than to tie her hands behind her back.

This something was what? The way he had sexually sized her up

when she first came to be interviewed in his office, or the way he
had failed to sexually size her up? It had been impossible to read his
reading of her, and that on a morning when she knew she had max-
imally deployed all her powers. She had wanted to look terrific and
she did, she had wanted to be fluent and she was, she had wanted to
sound scholarly and she'd succeeded, she was sure. And yet he
looked at her as if she were a schoolgirl, Mr. and Mrs. Inconsequen-
tial's little nobody child.

Now, perhaps that was because of the plaid kilt—the miniskirt-

like kilt might have made him think of a schoolgirl's uniform, espe-
cially as the person wearing it was a trim, tiny, dark-haired young
woman with a small face that was almost entirely eyes and who
weighed, clothes and all, barely a hundred pounds. All she'd in-
tended, with the kilt as with the black cashmere turtleneck, black

tights, and high black boots, was neither to desexualize herself by
what she chose to wear (the university women she'd met so far in
America seemed all too strenuously to be doing just that) nor to
appear to be trying to tantalize him. Though he was said to be in his
mid-sixties, he didn't look to be any older than her fifty-year-old
father; he in fact resembled a junior partner in her father's firm,
one of several of her father's engineering associates who'd been eye-
ing her since she was twelve. When, seated across from the dean, she
had crossed her legs and the flap of the kilt had fallen open, she had
waited a minute or two before pulling it closed—and pulling it
closed as perfunctorily as you close a wallet—only because, how-
ever young she looked, she wasn't a schoolgirl with a schoolgirl's
fears and a schoolgirl's primness, caged in by a schoolgirl's rules.
She did not wish to leave that impression any more than to give
the opposite impression by allowing the flap to remain open and
thereby inviting him to imagine that she meant him to gaze
throughout the interview at her slim thighs in the black tights.
She had tried as best she could, with the choice of clothing as
with her manner, to impress upon him the intricate interplay of all
the forces that came together to make her so interesting at twenty-
four.

Even her one piece of jewelry, the large ring she'd placed that

morning on the middle finger of her left hand, her sole decorative
ornament, had been selected for the sidelight it provided on the in-
tellectual she was, one for whom enjoying the aesthetic surface of
life openly, nondefensively, with her appetite and connoisseurship
undisguised, was nonetheless subsumed by a lifelong devotion to
scholarly endeavor. The ring, an eighteenth-century copy of a Ro-
man signet ring, was a man-sized ring formerly worn by a man. On
the oval agate, set horizontally—which was what made the ring so
masculinely chunky—was a carving of Danaë receiving Zeus as a
shower of gold. In Paris, four years earlier, when Delphine was
twenty, she had been given the ring as a love token from the profes-
sor to whom it belonged—the one professor whom she'd been un-
able to resist and with whom she'd had an impassioned affair. Co-

incidentally, he had been a classicist. The first time they met, in his
office, he had seemed so remote, so judging, that she found herself
paralyzed with fear until she realized that he was playing the seduc-
tion against the grain. Was that what this Dean Silk was up to?

However conspicuous the ring's size, the dean never did ask to

see the shower of gold carved in agate, and that, she decided, was
just as well. Though the story of how she'd come by the ring testi-
fied, if anything, to an audacious adultness, he would have thought
the ring a frivolous indulgence, a sign that she lacked maturity. Ex-
cept for the stray hope, she was sure that he was thinking about her
along those lines from the moment they'd shaken hands—and she
was right. Coleman's take on her was of someone too young for the
job, incorporating too many as yet unresolved contradictions, at
once a little too grand about herself and, simultaneously, playing
at self-importance like a child, an imperfectly self-governed child,
quick to respond to the scent of disapproval, with a considerable
talent for being wounded, and drawn on, as both child and
woman, to achievement upon achievement, admirer upon
admirer, conquest upon conquest, as much by uncertainty as by
confidence. Someone smart for her age, even too smart, but off
the mark emotionally and seriously underdeveloped in most other
ways.

From her c.v. and from a supplementary autobiographical essay

of fifteen pages that accompanied it—which detailed the progress
of an intellectual journey begun at age six—he got the picture
clearly enough. Her credentials were indeed excellent, but every-
thing about her (including the credentials) struck him as particu-
larly wrong for a little place like Athena. Privileged 16th arrondisse-
ment childhood on the rue de Longchamp. Monsieur Roux an
engineer, owner of a firm employing forty; Madame Roux (née de
Walincourt) born with an ancient noble name, provincial aristoc-
racy, wife, mother of three, scholar of medieval French literature,
master harpsichordist, scholar of harpsichord literature, papal his-
torian, "etc." And what a telling "etc." that was! Middle child and
only daughter Delphine graduated from the Lycée Janson de Sailly,

where she studied philosophy and literature, English and German,
Latin, French literature: "... read the entire body of French litera-
ture in a very canonical way." After the Lycée Janson, Lycée Henri
IV: ". . . grueling in-depth study of French literature and philoso-
phy, English language and literary history." At twenty, after the
Lycée Henri IV, the École Normale Supérieure de Fontenay: ". . .
with the élite of French intellectual society... only thirty a year se-
lected." Thesis: "Self-Denial in Georges Bataille." Bataille? Not an-
other one. Every ultra-cool Yale graduate student is working on
either Mallarmé or Bataille. It isn't difficult to understand what
she intends for him to understand, especially as Coleman knows
something of Paris from being a young professor with family on a
Fulbright one year, and knows something about these ambitious
French kids trained in the elite lycées. Extremely well prepared, in-
tellectually well connected, very smart immature young people en-
dowed with the most snobbish French education and vigorously
preparing to be envied all their lives, they hang out every Saturday
night at the cheap Vietnamese restaurant on rue St. Jacques talking
about great things, never any mention of trivialities or small talk—
ideas, politics, philosophy only. Even in their spare time, when they
are all alone, they think only about the reception of Hegel in twen-
tieth-century French intellectual life. The intellectual must not be
frivolous. Life only about thought. Whether brainwashed to be ag-
gressively Marxist or to be aggressively anti-Marxist, they are con-
genitally appalled by everything American. From this stuff and
more she comes to Yale: applies to teach French language to under-
graduates and to be incorporated into the Ph.D. program, and, as
she notes in her autobiographical essay, she is but one of two from
all of France who are accepted. "I arrived at Yale very Cartesian,
and there everything was much more pluralistic and polyphonic."
Amused by the undergraduates. Where's their intellectual side?
Completely shocked by their having fun. Their chaotic, nonideo-
logical way of thinking—of living! They've never even seen a Kuro-
sawa film—they don't know that much. By the time she was their
age, she'd seen all the Kurosawas, all the Tarkovskys, all the Fellinis,

WHAT  DO  YOU  D O . . . ?

all the Antonionis, all the Fassbinders, all the Wertmüllers, all the
Satyajit Rays, all the René Clairs, all the Wim Wenderses, all the
Truffauts, the Godards, the Chabrols, the Resnaises, the Rohmers,
the Renoirs, and all these kids have seen is Star Wars. In earnest at
Yale she resumes her intellectual mission, taking classes with the
most hip professors. A bit lost, however. Confused. Especially by
the other graduate students. She is used to being with people who
speak the same intellectual language, and these Americans . . .
And not everybody finds her that interesting. Expected to come to
America and have everyone say, "Oh, my God, she's a normalienne"
But in America no one appreciates the very special path she was on
in France and its enormous prestige. She's not getting the type of
recognition she was trained to get as a budding member of the
French intellectual elite. She's not even getting the kind of resent-
ment she was trained to get. Finds an adviser and writes her disser-
tation. Defends it. Is awarded the degree. Gets it extraordinarily
rapidly because she had already worked so hard in France. So much
schooling and hard work, ready now for the big job at the big
school—Princeton, Columbia, Cornell, Chicago—and when she
gets nothing, she is crushed. A visiting position at Athena College?
Where and what is Athena College? She turns up her nose. Until
her adviser says, "Delphine, in this market, you get your big job
from another job. Visiting assistant professor at Athena College?
You may not have heard of it, but we have. Perfectly decent institu-
tion. Perfectly decent job for a first job." Her fellow foreign graduate
students tell her that she's too good for Athena College, it would
be too declasse, but her fellow American graduate students, who
would kill for a job teaching in the Stop & Shop boiler room, think
that her uppityness is characteristically Delphine. Begrudgingly,
she applies—and winds up in her minikilt and boots across the
desk from Dean Silk. To get the second job, the fancy job, she first
needs this Athena job, but for nearly an hour Dean Silk listens to
her all but talk her way out of the Athena job. Narrative structure
and temporality. The internal contradictions of the work of art.
Rousseau hides himself and then his rhetoric gives him away. (A lit-

THE  HUMAN   STAIN

tie like her, thinks the dean, in that autobiographical essay.) The
critic's voice is as legitimate as the voice of Herodotus. Narratology.
The diegetic. The difference between diegesis and mimesis. The
bracketed experience. The proleptic quality of the text. Coleman
doesn't have to ask what all this means. He knows, in the original
Greek meaning, what all the Yale words mean and what all the
École Normale Supérieure words mean. Does she? As he's been at it
for over three decades, he hasn't time for any of this stuff. He
thinks: Why does someone so beautiful want to hide from the hu-
man dimension of her experience behind these words? Perhaps just
because she is so beautiful. He thinks: So carefully self-appraising
and so utterly deluded.

Of course she had the credentials. But to Coleman she embodied

the sort of prestigious academic crap that the Athena students
needed like a hole in the head but whose appeal to the faculty sec-
ond-raters would prove irresistible.

At the time he thought that he was being open-minded by hiring

her. But more likely it was because she was so goddamn enticing. So
lovely. So alluring. And all the more so for looking so daughterly.

Delphine Roux had misread his gaze by thinking, a bit melodra-

matically—one of the impediments to her adroitness, this impulse
not merely to leap to the melodramatic conclusion but to succumb
erotically to the melodramatic spell—that what he wanted was to
tie her hands behind her back: what he wanted, for every possible
reason, was not to have her around. And so he'd hired her. And thus
they seriously began not to get on.

And now it was she calling him to her office to be the inter-

viewee. By 1995, the year that Coleman had stepped down from the
deanship to return to teaching, the lure of petitely pretty Delphine's
all-encompassing chic, with its gaminish intimations of a subter-
ranean sensuality, along with the blandishments of her École
Normale sophistication (what Coleman described as "her perma-
nent act of self-inflation"), had appeared to him to have won over
just about every wooable fool professor and, not yet out of her
twenties—but with an eye perhaps on the deanship that had once

WHAT  DO  YOU  D O . . . ?

been Coleman's—she succeeded to the chair of the smallish depart-
ment that some dozen years earlier had absorbed, along with the
other language departments, the old Classics Department in which
Coleman had begun as an instructor. In the new Department of
Languages and Literature there was a staff of eleven, one professor
in Russian, one in Italian, one in Spanish, one in German, there was
Delphine in French and Coleman Silk in classics, and there were
five overworked adjuncts, fledgling instructors as well as a few local
foreigners, teaching the elementary courses.

"Miss Mitnick's misreading of those two plays," he was telling

her, "is so grounded in narrow, parochial ideological concerns that
it does not lend itself to correction."

"Then you don't deny what she says—that you didn't try to help

her."

"A student who tells me that I speak to her in 'engendered lan-

guage' is beyond being assisted by me."

"Then," Delphine said lightly, "there's the problem, isn't it?"
He laughed—both spontaneously and for a purpose. "Yes? The

English I speak is insufficiently nuanced for a mind as refined as
Miss Mitnick's?"

"Coleman, you've been out of the classroom for a very long

time."

"And you haven't been out of it ever. My dear," he said, deliber-

ately, and with a deliberately irritating smile, "I've been reading and
thinking about these plays all my life."

"But never from Elena's feminist perspective."
"Never even from Moses's Jewish perspective. Never even from

the fashionable Nietzschean perspective about perspective."

"Coleman Silk, alone on the planet, has no perspective other

than the purely disinterested literary perspective."

"Almost without exception, my dear"—again? why not?—"our

students are abysmally ignorant. They've been incredibly badly ed-
ucated. Their lives are intellectually barren. They arrive knowing
nothing and most of them leave knowing nothing. Least of all do
they know, when they show up in my class, how to read classical

THE  HUMAN  STAIN

drama. Teaching at Athena, particularly in the 1990s, teaching what
is far and away the dumbest generation in American history, is the
same as walking up Broadway in Manhattan talking to yourself, ex-
cept instead of the eighteen people who hear you in the street talk-
ing to yourself, they're all in the room. They know, like, nothing. Af-
ter nearly forty years of dealing with such students—and Miss
Mitnick is merely typical—I can tell you that a feminist perspective
on Euripides is what they least need. Providing the most naive of
readers with a feminist perspective on Euripides is one of the best
ways you could devise to close down their thinking before it's even
had a chance to begin to demolish a single one of their brainless
'likes.' I have trouble believing that an educated woman coming
from a French academic background like your own believes there is
a feminist perspective on Euripides that isn't simply foolishness.
Have you really been edified in so short a time, or is this just old-
fashioned careerism grounded right now in the fear of one's femi-
nist colleagues? Because if it is just careerism, it's fine with me. It's
human and I understand. But if it's an intellectual commitment
to this idiocy, then I am mystified, because you are not an idiot.
Because you know better. Because in France surely nobody from
the École Normale would dream of taking this stuff seriously. Or
would they? To read two plays like Hippolytus and Alcestis, then to
listen to a week of classroom discussion on each, then to have noth-
ing to say about either of them other than that they are 'degrading
to women,' isn't a 'perspective,' for Christ's sake—it's mouthwash.
It's just the latest mouthwash."

"Elena's a student. She's twenty years old. She's learning."

"Sentimentalizing one's students ill becomes you, my dear. Take
them seriously. Elena's not learning. She's parroting. Why she ran
directly to you is because it's more than likely you she's parroting."
"That is not true, though if it pleases you to culturally frame me
like that, that is okay too, and entirely predictable. If you feel safely
superior putting me in that silly frame, so be it, my dear," she de-
lighted now in saying with a smile of her own. "Your treatment of

WHAT  DO  YOU  D O . . . ?

Elena was offensive to her. That was why she ran to me. You fright-
ened her. She was upset."

"Well, I develop irritating personal mannerisms when I am con-

fronting the consequences of my ever having hired someone like
you."

"And," she replied, "some of our students develop irritating per-

sonal mannerisms when they are confronting fossilized pedagogy.
If you persist in teaching literature in the tedious way you are used
to, if you insist on the so-called humanist approach to Greek trag-
edy you've been taking since the 1950s, conflicts like this are going
to arise continually."

"Good," he said. "Let them come." And walked out. And then

that very next semester when Tracy Cummings ran to Professor
Roux, close to tears, barely able to speak, baffled at having learned
that, behind her back, Professor Silk had employed a malicious ra-
cial epithet to characterize her to her classmates, Delphine decided
that asking Coleman to her office to discuss the charge could only
be a waste of time. Since she was sure that he would behave no
more graciously than he had the last time a female student had
complained—and sure from past experience that should she call
him in, he would once again condescend to her in his patronizing
way, yet another upstart female daring to inquire into his conduct,
yet another woman whose concerns he must trivialize should he
deign even to address them—she had turned the matter over to the
accessible dean of faculty who had succeeded him. From then on
she was able to spend her time more usefully with Tracy, steadying,
comforting, as good as taking charge of the girl, a parentless black
youngster so badly demoralized that, in the first few weeks after
the episode, to prevent her from picking up and running away—
and running away to nothing—Delphine had gained permission to
move her out of the dormitory into a spare room in her own apart-
ment and to take her on, temporarily, as a kind of ward. Though by
the end of the academic year, Coleman Silk, by removing himself
from the faculty voluntarily, had essentially confessed to his malice

in the spooks affair, the damage done Tracy proved too debilitating
for someone so uncertain to begin with: unable to concentrate on
her work because of the investigation and frightened of Professor
Silk's prejudicing other teachers against her, she had failed all her
courses. Tracy packed up not only to leave the college but to pull
out of town altogether—out of Athena, where Delphine had been
hoping to find her a job and get her tutored and keep an eye on her
till she could get back into school. One day Tracy took a bus to
Oklahoma, to stay with a half-sister in Tulsa, yet using the Tulsa ad-
dress, Delphine had been unable to locate the girl ever again.

And then Delphine heard about Coleman Silk's relationship with

Faunia Farley, which he was doing everything possible to hide. She
couldn't believe it—two years into retirement, seventy-one years
old, and the man was still at it. With no more female students who
dared question his bias for him to intimidate, with no more young
black girls needing nurturing for him to ridicule, with no more
young women professors like herself threatening his hegemony for
him to browbeat and insult, he had managed to dredge up, from
the college's nethermost reaches, a candidate for subjugation who
was the prototype of female helplessness: a full-fledged battered
wife. When Delphine stopped by the personnel office to learn what
she could about Faunia's background, when she read about the ex-
husband and the horrifying death of the two small children—in a
mysterious fire set, some suspected, by the ex-husband—when she
read of the illiteracy that limited Faunia to performing only the
most menial of janitorial tasks, she understood that Coleman Silk
had managed to unearth no less than a misogynist's heart's desire:
in Faunia Farley he had found someone more defenseless even than
Elena or Tracy, the perfect woman to crush. For whoever at Athena
had ever dared to affront his preposterous sense of prerogative,
Faunia Farley would now be made to answer.

And no one to stop him, Delphine thought. No one to stand in

his way.

With the realization that he was beyond the jurisdiction of the

college and therefore restrained by nothing from taking his revenge

on her—on her, yes, on her for everything she had done to prevent
him from psychologically terrorizing his female students, on her
for the role she had willingly played in having him stripped of au-
thority and removed from the classroom—she was unable to con-
tain her outrage. Faunia Farley was his substitute for her. Through
Faunia Farley he was striking back at her. Who else's face and name
and form does she suggest to you but mine—the mirror image of
me, she could suggest to you no one else's. By luring a woman who
is, as I am, employed by Athena College, who is, as I am, less than
half your age—yet a woman otherwise my opposite in every way—
you at once cleverly masquerade and flagrantly disclose just who it
is you wish to destroy. You are not so unshrewd as not to know it,
and, from your own august station, you are ruthless enough to en-
joy it. But neither am I so stupid as not to recognize that it's me, in
effigy, you are out to get.

Understanding had come so swiftly, in sentences so spontane-

ously explosive, that even as she signed her name at the bottom of
the letter's second page and addressed an envelope to him in care of
general delivery, she was still seething at the thought of the vicious-
ness that could make of this dreadfully disadvantaged woman who
had already lost everything a toy, that could capriciously turn a suf-
fering human being like Faunia Farley into a plaything only so as to
revenge himself on her. How could even he do this? No, she would
not alter by one syllable what she'd written nor would she bother to
type it up so as to make it easier for him to read. She refused to viti-
ate her message where it was graphically demonstrated by the pro-
pulsive, driven slant of her script. Let him not underestimate her
resolve: nothing was now more important to her than exposing
Coleman Silk for what he was.

But twenty minutes later she tore up the letter. And luckily.

Luckily. When the unbridled idealism swept over her, she could not
always see it as fantasy. Right she was to reprimand so reprehensible
a predator. But to imagine saving a woman as far gone as Faunia
Farley when she hadn't been able to rescue Tracy? To imagine pre-
vailing against a man who, in his embittered old age, was free now

THE  HUMAN   STAIN

not only of every institutional restraint but—humanist that he
was!—of every humane consideration? For her there could be no
greater delusion than believing herself a match for Coleman Silk's
guile. Even a letter so clearly composed in the white heat of moral
repulsion, a letter unmistakably informing him that his secret was
out, that he was unmasked, exposed, tracked down, would some-
how, in his hands, be twisted into an indictment with which to
compromise her and, if the opportunity presented itself, to outright
ruin her.

He was ruthless and he was paranoid, and whether she liked it or

not, there were practical matters to take into account, concerns that
might not have impeded her back when she was a Marxist-oriented
lycée student whose inability to sanction injustice sometimes, ad-
mittedly, overtook common sense. But now she was a college pro-
fessor, awarded early tenure, already chairperson of her own de-
partment, and all but certain of moving on someday to Princeton,
to Columbia, to Cornell, to Chicago, perhaps even triumphantly
back to Yale. A letter like this, signed by her and passed from hand
to hand by Coleman Silk until, inevitably, it found its way to who-
ever, out of envy, out of resentment, because she was just too damn
successful too young, might wish to undermine her ... Yes, bold as
it was, with none of her fury censored out, this letter would be used
by him to trivialize her, to contend that she lacked maturity and
had no business being anyone's superior. He had connections, he
knew people still—he could do it. He would do it, so falsify her
meaning...

Quickly she tore the letter into tiny pieces and, at the center of a

clean sheet of paper, with a red ballpoint pen of the kind she ordi-
narily never used for correspondence and in big block letters that
no one would recognize as hers, she wrote:

Everyone knows

But that was all. She stopped herself there. Three nights later,

minutes after turning out the lights, she got up out of bed and, hav-
ing come to her senses, went to her desk to crumple up and discard

WHAT  DO  YOU  D O . . . ?

and forget forever the piece of paper beginning "Everyone knows"
and instead, leaning over the desk, without even seating herself—
fearing that in the time it took to sit down she would again lose her
nerve—she wrote in a rush ten more words that would suffice to let
him know that exposure was imminent. The envelope was ad-
dressed, stamped, the unsigned note sealed up inside it, the desk
lamp flicked off, and Delphine, relieved at having decisively settled
on the most telling thing to do within the practical limitations of
her situation, was back in bed and morally primed to sleep untrou-
bled.

But she had first to subdue everything driving her to get back up

and tear open the envelope so as to reread what she'd written, to see
if she had said too little or said it too feebly—or said it too stri-
dently. Of course that wasn't her rhetoric. It couldn't be. That's why
she'd used it—it was too blatant, too vulgar, far too sloganlike to be
traced to her. But for that very reason, it was perhaps misjudged by
her and unconvincing. She had to get up to see if she had remem-
bered to disguise her handwriting—to see if, inadvertently, under
the spell of the moment, in an angry flourish, she had forgotten
herself and signed her name. She had to see if there was any way in
which she had unthinkingly revealed who she was. And if she had?
She should sign her name. Her whole life had been a battle not to be
cowed by the Coleman Silks, who use their privilege to overpower
everyone else and do exactly as they please. Speaking to men.
Speaking up to men. Even to much older men. Learning not to be
fearful of their presumed authority or their sage pretensions. Fig-
uring out that her intelligence did matter. Daring to consider her-
self their equal. Learning, when she put forward an argument and it
didn't work, to overcome the urge to capitulate, learning to sum-
mon up the logic and the confidence and the cool to keep arguing,
no matter what they did or said to shut her up. Learning to take the
second step, to sustain the effort instead of collapsing. Learning to
argue her point without backing down. She didn't have to defer to
him, she didn't have to defer to anyone. He was no longer the dean
who had hired her. Nor was he department chair. She was. Dean

Silk was now nothing. She should indeed open that envelope to
sign her name. He was nothing. It had all the comfort of a mantra:
nothing.

She walked around with the sealed envelope in her purse for

weeks, going over her reasons, not only to send it but to go ahead
and sign it. He settles on this broken woman who cannot possibly
fight back. Who cannot begin to compete with him. Who intellec-
tually does not even exist. He settles on a woman who has never de-
fended herself, who cannot defend herself, the weakest woman on
this earth to take advantage of, drastically inferior to him in every
possible way—and settles on her for the most transparent of anti-
thetical motives: because he considers all women inferior and be-
cause he's frightened of any woman with a brain. Because I speak
up for myself, because I will not be bullied, because I'm successful,
because I'm attractive, because I'm independent-minded, because I
have a first-rate education, a first-rate degree...

And then, down in New York, where she'd gone one Saturday to

see the Jackson Pollock show, she pulled the envelope out of the
purse and all but dropped the twelve-word letter, unsigned, into a
mailbox in the Port Authority building, the first mailbox she saw
after stepping from the Bonanza bus. It was still in her hand when
she got on the subway, but once the train started moving she forgot
about the letter, stuck it back in her bag, and let the meaning-
fulness of the subway take hold. She remained amazed and excited
by the New York subway. When she was in the Métro in Paris she
never thought about it, but the melancholic anguish of the people
in the New York subway never failed to restore her belief in the
rightness of her having come to America. The New York subway
was the symbol of why she'd come—her refusal to shrink from
reality.

The Pollock show emotionally so took possession of her that she

felt, as she advanced from one stupendous painting to the next,
something of that swelling, clamorous feeling that is the mania of
lust. When a woman's cell phone suddenly went off while the whole

WHAT  DO  YOU  D O . . . ?

of the chaos of the painting entitled Number 1A, 1948 was enter-
ing wildly into the space that previously that day—previously that
year—had been nothing more than her body, she was so furious
that she turned and exclaimed, "Madam, I'd like to strangle you!"

Then she went to the New York Public Library on Forty-second

Street. She always did this in New York. She went to the museums,
to the galleries, to concerts, she went to the movies that would
never make their way to the one dreadful theater in backwoods
Athena, and, in the end, no matter what specific things she'd come
to New York to do, she wound up for an hour or so reading what-
ever book she'd brought with her while sitting in the main reading
room of the library.

She reads. She looks around. She observes. She has little crushes

on the men there. In Paris she had seen the movie Marathon Man at
one of the festivals. (No one knows that at the movies she is a terri-
ble sentimentalist and is often in tears.) In Marathon Man, the
character, the fake student, hangs out at the New York Public
Library and is picked up by Dustin Hoffman, and so it's in that ro-
mantic light that she has always thought of the New York Public
Library. So far no one has picked her up there, except for a medical
student who was too young, too raw, and immediately said the
wrong thing. Right off he had said something about her accent, and
she could not bear him. A boy who had not lived at all. He made
her feel like a grandmother. She had, by his age, been through so
many love affairs and so much thinking and rethinking, so many
levels of suffering—at twenty, years younger than him, she had al-
ready lived her big love story not once but twice. In part she had
come to America in flight from her love story (and, also, to make
her exit as a bit player in the long-running drama—entitled Etc.—
that was the almost criminally successful life of her mother). But
now she is extremely lonely in her plight to find a man to connect
with.

Others who try to pick her up sometimes say something accept-

able enough, sometimes ironic enough or mischievous enough to

be charming, but then—because up close she is more beautiful
than they had realized and, for one so petite, a little more arro-
gant than they may have expected—they get shy and back off. The
ones who make eye contact with her are automatically the ones she
doesn't like. And the ones who are lost in their books, who are
charmingly oblivious and charmingly desirable, are... lost in their
books. Whom is she looking for? She is looking for the man who is
going to recognize her. She is looking for the Great Recognizer.

Today she is reading, in French, a book by Julia Kristeva, a trea-

tise as wonderful as any ever written on melancholy, and across at
the next table she sees a man reading, of all things, a book in French
by Kristeva's husband, Philippe Sollers. Sollers is someone whose
playfulness she refuses any longer to take seriously for all that she
did at an earlier point in her intellectual development; the playful
French writers, unlike the playful Eastern European writers like
Kundera, no longer satisfy her . . . but that is not the issue at the
New York Public Library. The issue is the coincidence, a coin-
cidence that is almost sinister. In her craving, restless state, she
launches into a thousand speculations about the man who is read-
ing Sollers while she is reading Kristeva and feels the imminence
not only of a pickup but of an affair. She knows that this dark-
haired man of forty or forty-two has just the kind of gravitas that
she cannot find in anyone at Athena. What she is able to surmise
from the way he quietly sits and reads makes her increasingly hope-
ful that something is about to happen.

And something does: a girl comes by to meet him, decidedly a

girl, someone younger even than she is, and the two of them go off
together, and she gathers up her things and leaves the library and at
the first mailbox she sees, she takes the letter from her purse—the
letter she's been carrying there for over a month—and she thrusts it
into the mailbox with something like the fury with which she told
the woman at the Pollock show that she wanted to strangle her.
There! It's gone! I did it! Good!
A full five seconds must pass before the magnitude of the blun-

WHAT   DO  YOU  D O . . . ?

der overwhelms her and she feels her knees weaken. "Oh, my God!"
Even after her having left it unsigned, even after her having em-
ployed a vulgar rhetoric not her own, the letter's origins are going
to be no mystery to someone as fixated on her as Coleman Silk.
Now he will never leave her alone.

What Maniac Conceived It?

I SAW COLEMAN ALIVE only one more time after that July. He
himself never told me about the visit to the college or the phone
call from the student union to his son Jeff. I learned of his having
been on the campus that day because he'd been observed there—
inadvertently, from an office window—by his former colleague
Herb Keble, who, near the end of his speech at the funeral, alluded
to seeing Coleman standing hidden back against the shadowed wall
of North Hall, seemingly secreting himself for reasons that Keble
only could guess at. I knew about the phone call because Jeff Silk,
whom I spoke with after the funeral, mentioned something about
it, enough for me to know that the call had gone wildly out of
Coleman's control. It was directly from Nelson Primus that I
learned of the visit that Coleman had made to the attorney's office
earlier on the same day he'd phoned Jeff and that had ended, like
the other call, with Coleman lashing out in vituperative disgust. Af-
ter that, neither Primus nor Jeff Silk ever spoke to Coleman again.
Coleman didn't return their calls or mine—turned out he didn't re-
turn anyone's—and then it seems he disconnected his answering
machine, because soon enough the phone just rang on endlessly
when I tried to reach him.

He was there alone in the house, however—he hadn't gone away.

I knew he was there because, after a couple of weeks of phoning un-
successfully, one Saturday evening early in August I drove by after
dark to check. Only a few lamps were burning but, sure enough,
when I pulled over beside Coleman's hugely branched ancient ma-
ples, cut my engine, and sat motionless in the car on the blacktop
road down at the bottom of the undulating lawn, there was the
dance music coming from the open windows of the black-shut-
tered, white clapboard house, the evening-long Saturday FM pro-
gram that took him back to Steena Palsson and the basement room
on Sullivan Street right after the war. He is in there now just with
Faunia, each of them protecting the other against everyone else—
each of them, to the other, comprising everyone else. There they
dance, as likely as not unclothed, beyond the ordeal of the world, in
an unearthly paradise of earthbound lust where their coupling is
the drama into which they decant all the angry disappointment of
their lives. I remembered something he'd told me Faunia had said
in the afterglow of one of their evenings, when so much seemed to
be passing between them. He'd said to her, "This is more than sex,"
and flatly she replied, "No, it's not. You just forgot what sex is. This
is sex. All by itself. Don't fuck it up by pretending it's something
else."

Who are they now? They are the simplest version possible of

themselves. The essence of singularity. Everything painful con-
gealed into passion. They may no longer even regret that things are
not otherwise. They are too well entrenched in disgust for that.
They are out from under everything ever piled on top of them.
Nothing in life tempts them, nothing in life excites them, nothing
in life subdues their hatred of life anything like this intimacy. Who
are these drastically unalike people, so incongruously allied at sev-
enty-one and thirty-four? They are the disaster to which they are
enjoined. To the beat of Tommy Dorsey's band and the gentle
crooning of young Sinatra, dancing their way stark naked right into
a violent death. Everyone on earth does the end differently: this is

how the two of them work it out. There is now no way they will
stop themselves in time. It's done.

I am not alone in listening to the music from the road.

When my calls were not returned, I assumed that Coleman wished
to have nothing more to do with me. Something had gone wrong,
and I assumed, as one does when a friendship ends abruptly—a
new friendship particularly—that I was responsible, if not for some
indiscreet word or deed that had deeply irritated or offended him,
then by being who and what I am. Coleman had first come to me,
remember, because, unrealistically, he hoped to persuade me to
write the book explaining how the college had killed his wife; per-
mitting this same writer to nose around in his private life was prob-
ably the last thing he now wanted. I didn't know what to conclude
other than that his concealing from me the details of his life with
Faunia had, for whatever reason, come to seem to him far wiser
than his continuing to confide in me.

Of course I knew nothing then of the truth of his origins—that,

too, I'd learn about conclusively at the funeral—and so I couldn't
begin to surmise that the reason we'd never met in the years before
Iris's death, the reason that he'd wanted not to meet, was because I
had myself grown up only a few miles from East Orange and be-
cause, having more than a run-of-the-mill familiarity with the re-
gion, I might be too knowledgeable or too curious to leave his roots
in Jersey unscrutinized. Suppose I turned out to have been one
of the Newark Jewish boys in Doc Chizner's after-school boxing
classes? The fact is that I was one, but not until '46 and '47, by
which time Silky was no longer helping Doc teach kids like me the
right way to stand and move and throw a punch but was at NYU on
the GI Bill.

The fact is that, having befriended me during the time he was

writing his draft of Spooks, he had indeed taken the risk, and a fool-
ish one at that, of being exposed, nearly six decades on, as East
Orange High's Negro valedictorian, the colored kid who'd boxed
around Jersey in amateur bouts out of the Morton Street Boys Club

WHAT   MANIAC   CONCEIVED   IT?

before entering the navy as a white man; dropping me in the mid-
dle of that summer made sense for every possible reason, even if I
had no way of imagining why.

Well, to the last time I saw him. One August Saturday, out of loneli-
ness, I drove over to Tanglewood to hear the open rehearsal of the
next day's concert program. A week after having parked down from
his house, I was still both missing Coleman and missing the experi-
ence of having an intimate friend, and so I thought to make myself
a part of that smallish Saturday-morning audience that fills about a
quarter of the Music Shed for these rehearsals, an audience of sum-
mer folks who are music lovers and of visiting music students, but
mainly of elderly tourists, people with hearing aids and people car-
rying binoculars and people paging through the New York Times
who'd been bused to the Berkshires for the day.

Maybe it was the oddness born of my being out and about that

did it, the momentary experience of being a sociable creature (or a
creature feigning sociability), or maybe it was because of a fleeting
notion I had of the elderly congregated together in the audience as
embarkees, as deportees, waiting to be floated away on the music's
buoyancy from the all-too-tangible enclosure of old age, but on this
breezy, sunny Saturday in the last summer of Coleman Silk's life,
the Music Shed kept reminding me of the open-sided piers that
once extended cavernously out over the Hudson, as though one of
those spacious, steel-raftered piers dating from when ocean liners
docked in Manhattan had been raised from the water in all its
hugeness and rocketed north a hundred and twenty miles, set down
intact on the spacious Tanglewood lawn, a perfect landing amid the
tall trees and sweeping views of mountainous New England.

As I made my way to a single empty seat that I spotted, one of the

few empty seats close to the stage that nobody had as yet designated
as reserved by slinging a sweater or a jacket across it, I kept thinking
that we were all going somewhere together, had in fact gone and
gotten there, leaving everything behind . . . when all we were do-
ing was readying ourselves to hear the Boston Symphony rehearse

Rachmaninoff, Prokofiev, and Rimsky-Korsakov. Underfoot at the
Music Shed there's a packed brown earth floor that couldn't make it
clearer that your chair's aground on terra firma; roosting at the
peak of the structure are the birds whose tweeting you hear in the
weighty silence between orchestral movements, the swallows and
wrens that wing busily in from the woods down the hill and then go
zipping off again in a way no bird would have dared cut loose from
Noah's floating Ark. We were about a three-hour drive west of the
Atlantic, but I couldn't shake this dual sense of both being where I
was and of having pushed off, along with the rest of the senior citi-
zens, for a mysterious watery unknown.

Was it merely death that was on my mind in thinking of this de-

barkation? Death and myself? Death and Coleman? Or was it death
and an assemblage of people able still to find pleasure in being
bused about like a bunch of campers on a summer outing, and yet,
as a palpable human multitude, an entity of sensate flesh and warm
red blood, separated from oblivion by the thinnest, most fragile
layer of life?

The program that preceded the rehearsal was just ending when I

arrived. A lively lecturer dressed in a sport shirt and khaki trousers
stood before the empty orchestra chairs introducing the audience
to the last of the pieces they'd be hearing—on a tape machine
playing for them bits of Rachmaninoff and speaking brightly of
"the dark, rhythmic quality" of the Symphonic Dances. Only when
he'd finished and the audience broke into applause did somebody
emerge from the wings to uncover the timpani and begin to set out
the sheet music on the music stands. At the far side of the stage, a
couple of stagehands appeared carrying the harps, and then the
musicians entered, chatting with one another as they drifted on, all
of them, like the lecturer, casually dressed for the rehearsal—an
oboist in a gray hooded sweatshirt, a couple of bass players wearing
faded Levi's, and then the fiddle players, men and women alike
outfitted, from the look of it, by Banana Republic. As the conductor
was slipping on his glasses—a guest conductor, Sergiu Commis-
siona, an aged Romanian in a turtleneck shirt, white bush of hair

up top, blue espadrilles below—and the childishly courteous audi-
ence once again began to applaud, I noticed Coleman and Faunia
walking down the aisle, looking for a place close-up to sit.

The musicians, about to undergo their transformation from a

bunch of seemingly untroubled vacationers into a powerful, fluid
music machine, had already settled in and were tuning up as the
couple—the tall, gaunt-faced blond woman and the slender, hand-
some, gray-haired man not so tall as she and much older, though
still walking his light-footed athletic walk—made their way to two
empty seats three rows down from me and off to my right some
twenty feet.

The piece by Rimsky-Korsakov was a tuneful fairy tale of oboes

and flutes whose sweetness the audience found irresistible, and
when the orchestra came to the end of their first go-round enthusi-
astic applause again poured forth like an upsurge of innocence
from the elderly crowd. The musicians had indeed laid bare the
youngest, most innocent of our ideas of life, the indestructible
yearning for the way things aren't and can never be. Or so I thought
as I turned my gaze toward my former friend and his mistress and
found them looking nothing like so unusual or humanly isolated as
I'd been coming to envision the pair of them since Coleman had
dropped out of sight. They looked nothing like immoderate people,
least of all Faunia, whose sculpted Yankee features made me think
of a narrow room with windows in it but no door. Nothing about
these two seemed at odds with life or on the attack—or on the
defensive, either. Perhaps by herself, in this unfamiliar environ-
ment, Faunia mightn't have been so at ease as she seemed, but with
Coleman at her side, her affinity for the setting appeared no less
natural than the affinity for him. They didn't look like a pair of
desperadoes sitting there together but rather like a couple who
had achieved their own supremely concentrated serenity, who took
no notice whatsoever of the feelings and fantasies that their pres-
ence might foment anywhere in the world, let alone in Berkshire
County.

I wondered if Coleman had coached her beforehand on how he

wanted her to behave. I wondered if she'd listen if he had. I won-
dered if coaching was necessary. I wondered why he'd chosen to
bring her to Tanglewood. Simply because he wanted to hear the
music? Because he wanted her to hear it and to see the live musi-
cians? Under the auspices of Aphrodite, in the guise of Pygmalion,
and in the environs of Tanglewood, was the retired classics profes-
sor now bringing recalcitrant, transgressive Faunia to life as a taste-
fully civilized Galatea? Was Coleman embarked on educating her,
on influencing her—embarked on saving her from the tragedy of
her strangeness? Was Tanglewood a first big step toward making of
their waywardness something less unorthodox? Why so soon? Why
at all? Why, when everything they had and were together had
evolved out of the subterranean and the clandestinely crude? Why
bother to normalize or regularize this alliance, why even attempt to,
by going around as a "couple"? Since the publicness will tend only
to erode the intensity, is this, in fact, what they truly want? What he
wants? Was taming essential now to their lives, or did their being
here have no such meaning? Was this some joke they were playing,
an act designed to agitate, a deliberate provocation? Were they
smiling to themselves, these carnal beasts, or merely there listening
to the music?

Since they didn't get up to stretch or stroll around while the or-

chestra took a break and a piano was rolled onto the stage—for
Prokofiev's Second Piano Concerto—I remained in place as well.
There was a bit of a chill inside the shed, more of an autumnal than
a summery coolness, though the sunlight, spread brilliantly across
the great lawn, was warming those who preferred to listen and en-
joy themselves from outside, a mostly younger audience of twenty-
ish couples and mothers holding small children and picnicking
families already breaking out the lunch from their hampers. Three
rows down from me, Coleman, his head tipped slightly toward hers,
was talking to Faunia quietly, seriously, but about what, of course,
I did not know.

Because we don't know, do we? Everyone knows . . . How what

happens the way it does? What underlies the anarchy of the train of

WHAT   MANIAC   CONCEIVED   IT?

events, the uncertainties, the mishaps, the disunity, the shocking ir-
regularities that define human affairs? Nobody knows, Professor
Roux. "Everyone knows" is the invocation of the cliche and the be-
ginning of the banalization of experience, and it's the solemnity
and the sense of authority that people have in voicing the cliché
that's so insufferable. What we know is that, in an unclichéd way,
nobody knows anything. You can't know anything. The things you
know you don't know. Intention? Motive? Consequence? Meaning?
All that we don't know is astonishing. Even more astonishing is
what passes for knowing.

As the audience filed back in, I began, cartoonishly, to envisage

the fatal malady that, without anyone's recognizing it, was working
away inside us, within each and every one of us: to visualize the
blood vessels occluding under the baseball caps, the malignancies
growing beneath the permed white hair, the organs misfiring, atro-
phying, shutting down, the hundreds of billions of murderous cells
surreptitiously marching this entire audience toward the improba-
ble disaster ahead. I couldn't stop myself. The stupendous decima-
tion that is death sweeping us all away. Orchestra, audience, con-
ductor, technicians, swallows, wrens—think of the numbers for
Tanglewood alone just between now and the year 4000. Then mul-
tiply that times everything. The ceaseless perishing. What an idea!
What maniac conceived it? And yet what a lovely day it is today, a
gift of a day, a perfect day lacking nothing in a Massachusetts vaca-
tion spot that is itself as harmless and pretty as any on earth.

Then Bronfman appears. Bronfman the brontosaur! Mr. Fortis-

simo! Enter Bronfman to play Prokofiev at such a pace and with
such bravado as to knock my morbidity clear out of the ring. He is
conspicuously massive through the upper torso, a force of nature
camouflaged in a sweatshirt, somebody who has strolled into the
Music Shed out of a circus where he is the strongman and who
takes on the piano as a ridiculous challenge to the gargantuan
strength he revels in. Yefim Bronfman looks less like the person
who is going to play the piano than like the guy who should be
moving it. I had never before seen anybody go at a piano like this

sturdy little barrel of an unshaven Russian Jew. When he's finished,
I thought, they'll have to throw the thing out. He crushes it. He
doesn't let that piano conceal a thing. Whatever's in there is going
to come out, and come out with its hands in the air. And when it
does, everything there out in the open, the last of the last pulsation,
he himself gets up and goes, leaving behind him our redemption.
With a jaunty wave, he is suddenly gone, and though he takes all
his fire off with him like no less a force than Prometheus, our own
lives now seem inextinguishable. Nobody is dying, nobody—not if
Bronfman has anything to say about it!

There was another break in the rehearsal, and when Faunia and

Coleman got up this time, to leave the shed, so did I.I waited for
them to precede me, not sure how to approach Coleman or—since
it seemed that he no longer had any more use for me than for any-
one else hereabouts—whether to approach him at all. Yet I did miss
him. And what had I done? That yearning for a friend came to the
surface just as it had when we'd first met, and once again, because
of a magnetism in Coleman, an allure that I could never quite spec-
ify, I found no efficient way of putting it down.

I watched from some ten feet behind as they moved in a shuffling

cluster of people slowly up the incline of the aisle toward the sunlit
lawn, Coleman talking quietly to Faunia again, his hand between
her shoulder blades, the palm of his hand against her spine guiding
her along as he explained whatever he was now explaining about
whatever it was she did not know. Once outside, they set off across
the lawn, presumably toward the main gate and the dirt field be-
yond that was the parking lot, and I made no attempt to follow.
When I happened to look back toward the shed, I could see inside,
under the lights on the stage, that the eight beautiful bass fiddles
were in a neat row where the musicians, before going off to take a
break, had left them resting on their sides. Why this too should re-
mind me of the death of all of us I could not fathom. A graveyard
of horizontal instruments? Couldn't they more cheerily have put
me in mind of a pod of whales?

I was standing on the lawn stretching myself, taking the warmth

of the sun on my back for another few seconds before returning to
my seat to hear the Rachmaninoff, when I saw them returning—
apparently they'd left the vicinity of the shed only to walk the
grounds, perhaps for Coleman to show her the views off to the
south—and now they were headed back to hear the orchestra con-
clude its open rehearsal with the Symphonic Dances. To learn what I
could learn, I decided then to head directly toward them for all that
they still looked like people whose business was entirely their own.
Waving at Coleman, waving and saying "Hello, there. Coleman,
hello," I blocked their way.

"I thought I saw you," Coleman said, and though I didn't believe

him, I thought, What better to say to put her at her ease? To put me
at my ease. To put himself at his. Without a trace of anything but
the easygoing, hard-nosed dean-of-faculty charm, seemingly irri-
tated not at all by my sudden appearance, Coleman said, "Mr.
Bronfman's something. I was telling Faunia that he took ten years at
least out of that piano."

"I was thinking along those lines myself."
"This is Faunia Farley," he said to me, and to her, "This is Nathan

Zuckerman. You two met out at the farm."

Closer to my height than to his. Lean and austere. Little, if any-

thing, to be learned from the eyes. Decidedly uneloquent face. Sen-
suality? Nil. Nowhere to be seen. Outside the milking parlor, every-
thing alluring shut down. She had managed to make herself so that
she wasn't even here to be seen. The skill of an animal, whether
predator or prey.

She wore faded jeans and a pair of moccasins—as did Cole-

man—and, with the sleeves rolled up, an old button-down tatter-
sail shirt that I recognized as one of his.

"I've missed you," I said to him. "Maybe I can take you two to

dinner some night."

"Good idea. Yes. Let's do that."
Faunia was no longer paying attention. She was looking off into

the tops of the trees. They were swaying in the wind, but she was
watching them as though they were speaking. I realized then that

THE  HUMAN  STAIN

she was quite lacking in something, and I didn't mean the capacity
to attend to small talk. What I meant I would have named if I could.
It wasn't intelligence. It wasn't poise. It wasn't decorum or de-
cency—she could pull off that ploy easily enough. It wasn't depth
—shallowness wasn't the problem. It wasn't inwardness—one saw
that inwardly she was dealing with plenty. It wasn't sanity—she was
sane and, in a slightly sheepish way, haughty-seeming as well, supe-
rior through the authority of her suffering. Yet a piece of her was
decidedly not there.

I noticed a ring on the middle finger of her right hand. The stone

was milky white. An opal. I was sure that he had given it to her.

By contrast to Faunia, Coleman was very much of a piece, or ap-

peared so. Glibly so. I knew he had no intention of taking Faunia
out to dinner with me or anyone else.

"The Madamaska Inn," I said. "Eat outside. How about it?"
Never had I seen Coleman any more courtly than when he said

to me, lying, "The inn—right. We must. We will. But let us take
you. Nathan, let's speak," he said, suddenly in a rush and grabbing
at Faunia's hand. Motioning with his head toward the Music Shed,
he said, "I want Faunia to hear the Rachmaninoff." And they were
gone, the lovers, "fled away," as Keats wrote, "into the storm."

In barely a couple of minutes so much had happened, or seemed

to have happened—for nothing of any importance had actually oc-
curred—that instead of returning to my seat, I began to wander
about, like a sleepwalker at first, aimlessly heading across the lawn
dotted with picnickers and halfway around the Music Shed, then
doubling back to where the view of the Berkshires at the height of
summer is about as good as views get east of the Rockies. I could
hear in the distance the Rachmaninoff dances coming from the
shed, but otherwise I might have been off on my own, deep in the
fold of those green hills. I sat on the grass, astonished, unable to ac-
count for what I was thinking: he has a secret. This man con-
structed along the most convincing, believable emotional lines, this
force with a history as a force, this benignly wily, smoothly charm-

WHAT  MANIAC  CONCEIVED   IT?

ing, seeming totality of a manly man nonetheless has a gigantic se-
cret. How do I reach this conclusion? Why a secret? Because it is
there when he's with her. And when he's not with her it's there
too—it's the secret that's his magnetism. It's something not there
that beguiles, and it's what's been drawing me all along, the enig-
matic it that he holds apart as his and no one else's. He's set himself
up like the moon to be only half visible. And I cannot make him
fully visible. There is a blank. That's all I can say. They are, together,
a pair of blanks. There's a blank in her and, despite his air of being
someone firmly established, if need be an obstinate and purposeful
opponent—the angry faculty giant who quit rather than take their
humiliating crap—somewhere there's a blank in him too, a blotting
out, an excision, though of what I can't begin to guess... can't even
know, really, if I am making sense with this hunch or fancifully reg-
istering my ignorance of another human being.

Only some three months later, when I learned the secret and be-

gan this book—the book he had asked me to write in the first place,
but written not necessarily as he wanted it—did I understand the
underpinning of the pact between them: he had told her his whole
story. Faunia alone knew how Coleman Silk had come about being
himself. How do I know she knew? I don't. I couldn't know that ei-
ther. I can't know. Now that they're dead, nobody can know. For
better or worse, I can only do what everyone does who thinks that
they know. I imagine. I am forced to imagine. It happens to be what I
do for a living. It is my job. It's now all I do.

After Les got out of the VA hospital and hooked up with his sup-
port group so as to stay off the booze and not go haywire, the long-
range goal set for him by Louie Borrero was for Les to make a pil-
grimage to the Wall—if not to the real Wall, the Vietnam Veterans
Memorial in Washington, then to the Moving Wall when it arrived
in Pittsfield in November. Washington, D.C., was a city Les had
sworn he would never set foot in because of his hatred of the gov-
ernment and, since '92, because of his contempt for that draft

dodger sleeping in the White House. To get him to travel all the
way down to Washington from Massachusetts was probably asking
too much anyway: for someone still fresh from the hospital, there
would be too much emotion stretched over too many hours of
coming and going on the bus.

The way to prepare Les for the Moving Wall was the same way

Louie prepared everybody: start him off in a Chinese restaurant,
get Les to go along with another four or five guys for a Chinese din-
ner, arrange as many trips as it took—two, three, seven, twelve,
fifteen if need be—until he was able to last out one complete din-
ner, to eat all the courses, from soup to dessert, without sweating
through his shirt, without trembling so bad he couldn't hold still
enough to spoon his soup, without running outside every five min-
utes to breathe, without ending up vomiting in the bathroom and
hiding inside the locked stall, without, of course, losing it com-
pletely and going ballistic with the Chinese waiter.

Louie Borrero had his hundred percent service connection, he'd

been off drugs and on his meds now for twelve years, and helping
veterans, he said, was how he got his therapy. Thirty-odd years on,
there were a lot of Vietnam veterans still out there hurting, and so
he spent just about all day every day driving around the state in his
van, heading up support groups for veterans and their families,
finding them doctors, getting them to AA meetings, listening to all
sorts of troubles, domestic, psychiatric, financial, advising on VA
problems, and trying to get the guys down to Washington to the
Wall.

The Wall was Louie's baby. He organized everything: chartered

the buses, arranged for the food, with his gift for gentle camarade-
rie took personal care of the guys terrified they were going to cry
too hard or feel too sick or have a heart attack and die. Beforehand
they all backed off by saying more or less the same thing: "No way. I
can't go to the Wall. I can't go down there and see so-and-so's name.
No way. No how. Can't do it." Les, for one, had told Louie, "I heard
about your trip that last time. I heard all about how bad it went.

WHAT MANIAC CONCEIVED  IT?

Twenty-five dollars a head for this charter bus. Supposed to include
lunch, and the guys all say the lunch was shit—wasn't worth two
bucks. And that New York guy didn't want to wait around, the
driver. Right, Lou? Wanted to get back early to do a run to Atlantic
City? Atlantic City! Fuck that shit, man. Rushin' everything and ev-
erybody and then lookin' for a big tip at the end? Not me, Lou. No
fuckin' way. If I had to see a couple of guys in tiger suits falling into
each other's arms and sobbin', I'd puke."

But Louie knew what a visit could mean. "Les, it's nineteen hun-

dred and ninety-eight. It's the end of the twentieth century, Lester.
It's time you started to face this thing. You can't do it all at once, I
know that, and nobody is going to ask you to. But it's time to work
your program, buddy. The time has come. We're not gonna start
with the Wall. We're gonna start slow. We're gonna start off with a
Chinese restaurant."

But for Les that wasn't starting slow; for Les, just going for the

take-out down in Athena, he'd had to wait in the truck while Faunia
picked up the food. If he went inside, he'd want to kill the gooks as
soon as he saw them. "But they're Chinese," Faunia told him, "not
Vietnamese." "Asshole! I don't care what the fuck they are! They
count as gooks! A gook is a gook!"

As if he hadn't slept badly enough for the last twenty-six years,

the week before the visit to the Chinese restaurant he didn't sleep
at all. He must have telephoned Louie fifty times telling him he
couldn't go, and easily half the calls were placed after 3 A.M. But
Louie listened no matter what the hour, let him say everything on
his mind, even agreed with him, patiently muttered "Uh-huh . . .
uh-huh... uh-huh" right on through, but in the end he always shut
him down the same way: "You're going to sit there, Les, as best you
can. That's all you have to do. Whatever gets going in you, if it's sad-
ness, if it's anger, whatever it is—the hatred, the rage—we're all go-
ing to be there with you, and you're going to try to sit there with-
out running or doing anything." "But the waiter" Les would say,
"how am I going to deal with the fucking waiter? I can't, Lou—I'll

THE HUMAN  STAIN

fuckin' lose it!" "I'll deal with the waiter. All you have to do is sit." To
whatever objection Les raised, including the danger that he might
kill the waiter, Louie replied that all he'd have to do was sit. As if that
was all it took—sitting—to stop a man from killing his worst enemy.
They were five in Louie's van when they went up to Blackwell
one evening barely two weeks after Les's release from the hospital.
There was the mother-father-brother-leader, Louie, a bald guy,
clean-shaven, neatly dressed, wearing freshly pressed clothes and
his black Vietnam Vet cap and carrying his cane, and, what with his
short stature, sloping shoulders, and high paunch, looking a little
like a penguin because of the stiff way he walked on his bad legs.
Then there were the big guys who never said much: Chet, the
thrice-divorced housepainter who'd been a marine—three different
wives scared out of their wits by this brute-sized, opaque, pony-
tailed lug without any desire ever to speak—and Bobcat, an ex-
rifleman who'd lost a foot to a land mine and worked for Midas
Muffler. Last, there was an undernourished oddball, a skinny,
twitchy asthmatic missing most of his molars, who called himself
Swift, having legally changed his name after his discharge, as
though his no longer being Joe Brown or Bill Green or whoever he
was when he was drafted would cause him, back home, to leap out
of bed every morning with joy. Since Vietnam, Swift's health had
been close to destroyed by every variety of skin and respiratory and
neurological ailment, and now he was being eaten away by an an-
tagonism toward the Gulf War vets that exceeded even Les's dis-
dain. All the way up to Blackwell, with Les already beginning to
shake and feel queasy, Swift more than made up for the silence of
the big guys. That wheezing voice of his would not stop. "Their big-
gest problem is they can't go to the beach? They get upset at the
beach when they see the sand? Shit. Weekend warriors and all of a
sudden they have to see some real action. That's why they're pissed
off—all in the reserves, never thought they were going to be called
up, and then they get called up. And they didn't do dick. They don't
know what war is. Call that a war? Four-day ground war? How
many gooks did they kill? They're all upset they didn't take out

WHAT   MANIAC   CONCEIVED   IT?

Saddam Hussein. They got one enemy—Saddam Hussein. Gimme
a break. There's nothin' wrong with these guys. They just want
money without puttin' in the hard time. A rash. You know how
many rashes I got from Agent Orange? I'm not goin' to live to see
sixty, and these guys are worryin' about a rash!"

The Chinese restaurant sat up at the north edge of Blackwell, on

the highway just beyond the boarded-up paper mill and backing
onto the river. The concrete-block building was low and long and
pink, with a plate-glass window at the front, and half of it was
painted to look like brickwork—pink brickwork. Years ago it had
been a bowling alley. In the big window, the erratically flickering
letters of a neon sign meant to look Chinese spelled out "The Har-
mony Palace."

For Les, the sight of that sign was enough to erase the slightest

glimmer of hope. He couldn't do it. He'd never make it. He'd lose it
completely.

The monotonousness of repeating those words—and yet the

force it took for him to surmount the terror. The river of blood he
had to wade through to make it by the smiling gook at the door and
take his seat at the table. And the horror—a deranging horror
against which there was no protection—of the smiling gook hand-
ing him a menu. The outright grotesquerie of the gook pouring
him a glass of water. Offering him water! The very source of all his
suffering could have been that water. That's how crazy it made him
feel.

"Okay, Les, you're doin' good. Doin' real good," said Louie. "Just

have to take this one course at a time. Real good so far. Now I want
you to deal with your menu. That's all. Just the menu. Just open the
menu, open it up, and I want you to focus on the soups. The only
thing you have to do now is order your soup. That's all you gotta do.
If you can't make up your mind, we'll decide for you. They got
mighty good wonton soup here."

"Fuckin' waiter," Les said.
"He's not the waiter, Les. His name is Henry. He's the owner. Les,

we gotta focus on the soup. Henry, he's here to run his place. To be

sure everything is running okay. No more, no less. He doesn't know
about all that other stuff. Doesn't know about it, doesn't want to.
What about your soup?"

of this desperate drama, he, Les, had managed to stand apart from
all the turmoil and ask what they were having to eat.

"Wonton," they all said.
"All right. Wonton."
"Okay," Louie said. "Now we're going to order the other stuff. Do

we want to share? Would that be too much, Les, or do you want
your own thing? Les, what do you want? You want chicken, vegeta-
bles, pork? You want lo mein? With the noodles?"

He tried to see if he could do it again. "What are you guys going

to have?"

beef—"

"I don't care!" And why he didn't care was because this all was

happening on some other planet, this pretending that they were or-
dering Chinese food. This was not what was really happening.

"Double-sautéed pork? Double-sautéed pork for Les. Okay. All

you have to do now, Les, is concentrate and Chet'll pour you some
tea. Okay? Okay."

"Just keep the fucking waiter away." Because from the corner of

his eye he'd spotted some movement.

"Sir, sir—" Louie called to the waiter. "Sir, if you just stay there,

we'll come to you with our order. If you wouldn't mind. We'll
bring the order to you—you just keep a distance." But the waiter
seemed not to understand, and when he again started toward them,
clumsily but quickly Louie rose up on his bad legs. "Sir! We'll bring
the order to you. To. You. Right? Right," Louie said, sitting back
down again. "Good," he said, "good," nodding at the waiter, who
stood stock-still some ten feet away. "That's it, sir. That's perfect."

The Harmony Palace was a dark place with fake plants scattered

along the walls and maybe as many as fifty tables spaced in rows
down the length of the long dining room. Only a few of them were

WHAT   MANIAC  CONCEIVED   IT?

occupied, and all of those far enough away so that none of the other
customers seemed to have noticed the brief disturbance up at the
end where the five men were eating. As a precaution, Louie always
made certain, coming in, to get Henry to place his party at a table
apart from everyone else. He and Henry had been through this be-
fore.

"Okay, Les, we got it under control. You can let go of the menu

now. Les, let go of the menu. First with your right hand. Now your
left hand. There. Chet'll fold it up for you."

The big guys, Chet and Bobcat, had been seated to either side of

Les. They were assigned by Louie to be the evening's MPs and knew
what to do if Les made a wrong move. Swift sat at the other side of
the round table, next to Louie, who directly faced Les, and now, in
the helpful tones a father might use with a son he was teaching to
ride a bike, Swift said to Les, "I remember the first time I came here.
I thought I'd never make it through. You're doin' real good. My first
time, I couldn't even read the menu. The letters, they all were
swimmin' at me. I thought I was goin' to bust through the window.
Two guys, they had to take me out 'cause I couldn't sit still. You're
doin' a good job, Les." If Les had been able to notice anything other
than how much his hands were now trembling, he would have real-
ized that he'd never before seen Swift not twitching. Swift neither
twitching nor bitching. That was why Louie had brought him along
—because helping somebody through the Chinese meal seemed to
be the thing that Swift did best in this world. Here at The Harmony
Palace, as nowhere else, Swift seemed for a while to remember what
was what. Here one had only the faintest sense of him as someone
crawling through life on his hands and knees. Here, made manifest
in this embittered, ailing remnant of a man was a tiny, tattered
piece of what had once been courage. "You're doin' a good job, Les.
You're doin' all right. You just have to have a little tea," Swift sug-
gested. "Let Chet pour some tea."

"Breathe," Louie said. "That's it. Breathe, Les. If you can't make it

after the soup, we'll go. But you have to make it through the first
course. If you can't make it through the double-sautéed pork, that's

THE  HUMAN  STAIN

okay. But you have to make it through the soup. Let's make a code
word if you have to get out. A code word that you can give me when
there's just no two ways about it. How about 'tea leaf for the code
word? That's all you have to say and we're out of here. Tea leaf. If
you need it, there it is. But only if you need it."

The waiter was poised at a little distance holding the tray with

their five bowls of soup. Chet and Bobcat hopped right up and got
the soup and brought it to the table.

Now Les just wants to say "tea leaf" and get the fuck out. Why

doesn't he? I gotta get out of here. I gotta get out of here.

By repeating to himself "I gotta get out of here," he is able to put

himself into a trance and, even without any appetite, to begin to eat
his soup. To take down a little of the broth. "I gotta get out of here,"
and this blocks out the waiter and it blocks out the owner but it
does not block out the two women at a wall-side table who are
opening pea pods and dropping the shelled peas into a cooking pot.
Thirty feet away, and Les can pick up the scent of whatever's the
brand of cheap toilet water that they've sprayed behind their four
gook ears—it's as pungent to him as the smell of raw earth. With
the same phenomenal lifesaving powers that enabled him to detect
the unwashed odor of a soundless sniper in the black thickness of
a Vietnam jungle, he smells the women and begins to lose it. No
one told him there were going to be women here doing that. How
long are they going to be doing that? Two young women. Gooks.
Why are they sitting there doing that? "I gotta get out of here." But
he cannot move because he cannot divert his attention from the
women.

"Why are those women doing that?" Les asks Louie. "Why don't

they stop doing that? Do they have to keep doing that? Are they
gonna keep doing that all night long? Are they gonna keep doing
that over and over? Is there a reason? Can somebody tell me the
reason? Make them stop doing that."

"Cool it," Louie says.
"I am cool. I just wanna know—are they gonna keep doing that?

Can anyone stop them? Is there nobody who can think of a way?'

WHAT  MANIAC  CONCEIVED  IT?

His voice rising now, and no easier to stop that happening than to
stop those women.

"Les, we're in a restaurant. In a restaurant they prepare beans."
"Peas," Les says. "Those are peas!"
"Les, you got your soup and you got your next course coming.

The next course: that's the whole world right now. That's every-
thing. That's it. All you got to do next is eat some double-sautéed
pork, and that's it."

"I had enough soup."
"Yeah?" Bobcat says. "You're not going to eat that? You done with

that?"

Besieged on all sides by the disaster to come—how long can

the agony be transformed into eating?—Les manages, beneath his
breath, to say "Take it."

And that's when the waiter makes his move—purportedly going

for the empty plates.

"No!" roars Les, and Louie is on his feet again, and now, looking

like the lion tamer in the circus—and with Les taut and ready for
the waiter to attack—Louie points the waiter back with his cane.

"You stay there," Louie says to the waiter. "Stay there. We bring

the empty plates to you. You don't come to us."

The women shelling the peas have stopped, and without Les's

even getting up and going over and showing them how to stop.

And Henry is in on it now, that's clear. This rangy, thin, smiling

Henry, a young guy in jeans and a loud shirt and running shoes
who poured the water and is the owner, is staring at Les from the
door. Smiling but staring. That man is a menace. He is blocking the
exit. Henry has got to go.

derful food. That's why we come back." To the waiter he then says,
"Just follow my lead," and then he lowers his cane and sits back
down. Chet and Bobcat gather up the empty plates and go over and
pile them on the waiter's tray.

"Anybody else?" Louie asks. "Anybody else got a story about his

first time?"

THE  HUMAN  STAIN

"Uh-uh," says Chet while Bobcat sets himself the pleasant task of

polishing off Les's soup.

This time, as soon as the waiter comes out of the kitchen carry-

ing the rest of their order, Chet and Bobcat get right up and go over
to the dumb fucking gook before he can even begin to forget and
start approaching the table again.

And now it's out there. The food. The agony that is the food.

Shrimp beef lo mein. Moo goo gai pan. Beef with peppers. Double-
sautéed pork. Ribs. Rice. The agony of the rice. The agony of the
steam. The agony of the smells. Everything out there is supposed to
save him from death. Link him backward to Les the boy. That is the
recurring dream: the unbroken boy on the farm.

"Looks good!"
"Tastes better!"
"You want Chet to put some on your plate, or you want to take

for yourself, Les?"

"Not hungry."
"That's all right," Louie says, as Chet begins piling things on Les's

plate for him. "You don't have to be hungry. That's not the deal."

"This almost over?" Les says. "I gotta get out of here. I'm not

kiddin', guys. I really gotta get out of here. Had enough. Can't take
it. I feel like I'm gonna lose control. I've had enough. You said I
could leave. I gotta get out."

"I don't hear the code word, Les," Louie says, "so we're going to

keep going."

Now the shakes have set in big-time. He cannot deal with the

rice. It falls off the fork, he's shaking so bad.

And, Christ almighty, here comes a waiter with the water. Cir-

cling around and coming at Lester from the back, from out of
fucking nowhere, another waiter. They are all at once but a split
second away from Les yelling "Yahhh!" and going for the waiter's
throat, and the water pitcher exploding at his feet.

"Stop!" cries Louie. "Back off!"
The women shelling the peas start screaming.
"He does not need any water!" Shouting, standing on his feet and

shouting, with his cane raised over his head, Louie looks to the
women like the one who is nuts. But they don't know what nuts is if
they think that Louie's nuts. They have no idea.

and talks to them quietly until they are all sitting down. He has ex-
plained that those are Vietnam veterans, and whenever they come
around, he takes it as a patriotic duty to be hospitable to them and
to put up for an hour or two with their problems.

There is absolute quiet in the restaurant from then on. Les picks

at a little food and the others eat up everything until the only food
left on the table is the stuff still on Les's plate.

"You done with that?" Bobcat asks him. "You not gonna eat

that?"

This time he can't even manage "take it." Say just those two

words, and everybody buried beneath that restaurant floor will
come rising up to seek revenge. Say one word, and if you weren't
there the first time to see what it looked like, you sure as shit will see
it now.

Here come the fortune cookies. Usually they love that. Read

the fortunes, laugh, drink the tea—who doesn't love that? But Les
shouts "Tea leaf!" and takes off, and Louie says to Swift, "Go out
with him. Get him, Swiftie. Keep an eye on him. Don't let him out
of your sight. We're gonna pay up."

On the way home there is silence: from Bobcat silence because he

is laden with food; from Chet silence because he long ago learned
through the repetitious punishment of too many brawls that for
a man as fucked up as himself, silence is the only way to seem
friendly; and from Swift silence too, a bitter and disgruntled silence,
because once the flickering neon lights are behind them, so is the
memory of himself that he seems to have had at The Harmony Pal-
ace. Swift is now busy stoking the pain.

Les is silent because he is sleeping. After the ten days of solid in-

somnia that led up to this trip, he is finally out.

It's when everybody else has been dropped off and Les and Louie

are alone in the van that Louie hears him coming round and says,

"Les? Les? You did good, Lester. I saw you sweatin', I thought,
Umm-umm-umm, no way he's gonna make it. You should have
seen the color you were. I couldn't believe it. I thought the waiter
was finished." Louie, who spent his first nights home handcuffed to
a radiator in his sister's garage to assure himself he would not kill
the brother-in-law who'd kindly taken him in when he was back
from the jungle only forty-eight hours, whose waking hours are so
organized around all the others' needs that no demonic urge can
possibly squeeze back in, who, over a dozen years of being sober
and clean, of working the Twelve Steps and religiously taking his
meds—for the anxiety his Klonopin, for the depression his Zoloft,
for the sizzling ankles and the gnawing knees and the relentlessly
aching hips his Salsalate, an anti-inflammatory that half the tune
does little other than to give him a burning stomach, gas, and the
shits—has managed to clear away enough debris to be able to talk
civilly again to others and to feel, if not at home, then less crazily
aggrieved at having to move inefficiently about for the rest of his
life on those pain-ridden legs, at having to try to stand tall on a
foundation of sand—happy-go-lucky Louie laughs. "I thought he
didn't have a chance. But, man," says Louie, "you didn't just make it
past the soup, you made it to the fucking fortune cookie. You know
how many times it took me to make it to the fortune cookie? Four.
Four times, Les. The first time I headed straight for the bathroom
and it took them fifteen minutes to get me out. You know what I'm
gonna tell my wife? I'm goin' to tell her, 'Les, did okay. Les did all
right.'"

But when it came time to return, Les refused. "Isn't it enough

that I sat there?" "I want you to eat," Louie said. "I want you to eat
the meal. Walk the walk, talk the talk, eat the meal. We got a new
goal, Les." "I don't want any more of your goals. I made it through. I
didn't kill anyone. Isn't that enough?" But a week later back they
drove to The Harmony Palace, same cast of characters, same glass
of water, same menus, even the same cheap toilet water scent emit-
ted by the sprayed Asian flesh of the restaurant women and wafting
its sweet galvanic way to Les, the telltale scent by which he can track

his prey. The second time he eats, the third time he eats and or-
ders—though they still won't let the waiter near the table—and the
fourth time they let the waiter serve them, and Les eats like a crazy
man, eats till he nearly bursts, eats as if he hasn't seen food in a year.

Outside The Harmony Palace, high fives all around. Even Chet is

joyous. Chet speaks, Chet shouts, "Semper fi!"

"Next time," says Les, while they're driving home and the feeling

is heady of being raised from the grave, "next time, Louie, you're
gonna go too far. Next time you're gonna want me to like it!"

But what is next is facing the Wall. He has to go look at Kenny's

name. And this he can't do. It was enough once to look up Kenny's
name in the book they've got at the VA. After, he was sick for a
week. That was all he could think about. That's all he can think
about anyway. Kenny there beside him without his head. Day and
night he thinks, Why Kenny, why Chip, why Buddy, why them and
not me? Sometimes he thinks that they're the lucky ones. It's over
for them. No, no way, no how, is he going to the Wall. That Wall.
Absolutely not. Can't do it. Won't do it. That's it.

Dance for me.

They've been together for about six months, and so one night he

says, "Come on, dance for me," and in the bedroom he puts on a
CD, the Artie Shaw arrangement of "The Man I Love," with Roy
Eldridge playing trumpet. Dance for me, he says, loosening the
arms that are tight around her and pointing toward the floor at
the foot of the bed. And so, undismayed, she gets up from where
she's been smelling that smell, the smell that is Coleman unclothed,
that smell of sun-baked skin—gets up from where she's been lying
deeply nestled, her face cushioned in his bare side, her teeth, her
tongue glazed with his come, her hand, below his belly, splayed
across the crinkled, buttery tangle of that coiled hair, and, with him
keeping an eagle eye on her—his green gaze unwavering through
the dark fringe of his long lashes, not at all like a depleted old man
ready to faint but like somebody pressed up against a window-
pane—she does it, not coquettishly, not like Steena did in 1948, not

because she's a sweet girl, a sweet young girl dancing for the plea-
sure of giving him the pleasure, a sweet young girl who doesn't
know much about what she's doing saying to herself, "I can give
him that—he wants that, and I can do it, and so here it is." No, not
quite the naive and innocent scene of the bud becoming the flower
or the filly becoming the mare. Faunia can do it, all right, but with-
out the budding maturity is how she does it, without the youthful,
misty idealization of herself and him and everyone living and dead.
He says, "Come on, dance for me," and, with her easy laugh, she
says, "Why not? I'm generous that way," and she starts moving,
smoothing her skin as though it's a rumpled dress, seeing to it that
everything is where it should be, taut, bony, or rounded as it should
be, a whiff of herself, the evocative vegetal smell coming familiarly
off her fingers as she slides them up from her neck and across her
warm ears and slowly from there over her cheeks to her lips, and
her hair, her graying yellow hair that is damp and straggly from ex-
ertion, she plays with like seaweed, pretends to herself that it's sea-
weed, that it's always been seaweed, a great trickling sweep of sea-
weed saturated with brine, and what's it cost her, anyway? What's
the big deal? Plunge in. Pour forth. If this is what he wants, abduct
the man, ensnare him. Wouldn't be the first one.

She's aware when it starts happening: that thing, that connection.

She moves, from the floor that is now her stage at the foot of the
bed she moves, alluringly tousled and a little greasy from the hours
before, smeared and anointed from the preceding performance,
fair-haired, white-skinned where she isn't tanned from the farm,
scarred in half a dozen places, one kneecap abraded like a child's
from when she slipped in the barn, very fine threadlike cuts half
healed on both her arms and legs from the pasture fencing, her
hands roughened, reddened, sore from the fiberglass splinters
picked up while rotating the fence, from pulling out and putting in
those stakes every week, a petal-shaped, rouge-colored bruise either
from the milking parlor or from him precisely at the joining of her
throat and torso, another bruise, blue-black at the turn of her
unmuscled thigh, spots where she's been bitten and stung, a hair of

WHAT  MANIAC  CONCEIVED  IT?

his, an ampersand of his hair like a dainty grayish mole adhering to
her cheek, her mouth open just wide enough to reveal the curve of
her teeth, and in no hurry at all to go anywhere because it's the get-
ting there that's the fun. She moves, and now he's seeing her, seeing
this elongated body rhythmically moving, this slender body that is
so much stronger than it looks and surprisingly so heavy-breasted
dipping, dipping, dipping, on the long, straight handles of her legs
stooping toward him like a dipper filled to the limit with his liquid.
Unresisting, he's stretched across the wavelets of bedsheets, a sinu-
ous swirl of pillows balled together to support his head, his head
resting level with the span of her hips, with her belly, with her mov-
ing belly, and he's seeing her, every particle, he's seeing her and she
knows that he's seeing her. They're connected. She knows he wants
her to claim something. He wants me to stand here and move, she
thinks, and to claim what is mine. Which is? Him. Him. He's offer-
ing me him. Okey-dokey, this is high-voltage stuff but here we go.
And so, giving him her downturned look with the subtlety in it, she
moves, she moves, and the formal transfer of power begins. And it's
very nice for her, moving like this to that music and the power pass-
ing over, knowing that at her slightest command, with the flick of
the finger that summons a waiter, he would crawl out of that bed to
lick her feet. So soon in the dance, and already she could peel him
and eat him like a piece of fruit. It's not all about being beat up and
being the janitor and I'm at the college cleaning up other people's
shit and I'm at the post office cleaning up other people's shit, and
there's a terrible toughness that comes with that, with cleaning up
everybody else's waste; if you want to know the truth, it sucks, and
don't tell me there aren't better jobs, but I've got it, it's what I do,
three jobs, because this car's got about six days left, I've got to buy a
cheap car that runs, so three jobs is what I'm doing, and not for the
first time, and by the way, the dairy farm is a lot of fucking work, to
you it sounds great and to you it looks great, Faunia and the cows,
but coming on top of everything else it breaks my fucking hump...
But now I'm naked in a room with a man, seeing him lying there
with his dick and that navy tattoo, and it's calm and he's calm, even

getting a charge out of seeing me dance he's so very calm, and he's
just had the shit kicked out of him, too. He's lost his wife, he's lost
his job, publicly humiliated as a racist professor, and what's a racist
professor? It's not that you've just become one. The story is you've
been discovered, so it's been your whole life. It's not just that you
did one thing wrong once. If you're a racist, then you've always
been a racist. Suddenly it's your entire life you've been a racist.
That's the stigma and it's not even true, and yet now he's calm. I can
do that for him. I can make him calm like this, he can make me
calm like this. All I have to do is just keep moving. He says dance for
me and I think, Why not? Why not, except that it's going to make
him think that I'm going to go along and pretend with him that this
is something else. He's going to pretend that the world is ours, and
I'm going to let him, and then I'm going to do it too. Still, why not?
I can dance... but he has to remember. This is only what it is, even
if I'm wearing nothing but the opal ring, nothing on me but the
ring he gave me. This is standing in front of your lover naked with
the lights on and moving. Okay, you're a man, and you're not in
your prime, and you've got a life and I'm not part of it, but I know
what's here. You come to me as a man. So I come to you. That's a
lot. But that's all it is. I'm dancing in front of you naked with the
lights on, and you're naked too, and all the other stuff doesn't mat-
ter. It's the simplest thing we've ever done—it's it. Don't fuck it up
by thinking it's more than this. You don't, and I won't. It doesn't
have to be more than this. You know what? I see you, Coleman.
Then she says it aloud. "You know what? I see you."

"Do you?" he says. "Then now the hell begins."
"You think—if you ever want to know—is there a God? You

want to know why am I in this world? What is it about? It's about
this. It's about, You're here, and I'll do it for you. It's about not
thinking you're someone else somewhere else. You're a woman and
you're in bed with your husband, and you're not fucking for fuck-
ing, you're not fucking to come, you're fucking because you're in
bed with your husband and it's the right thing to do. You're a man
and you're with your wife and you're fucking her, but you're think-

ing you want to be fucking the post office janitor. Okay—you know
what? You're with the janitor."

He says softly, with a laugh, "And that proves the existence of

God."

"If that doesn't, nothing does."
"Keep dancing," he says.
"When you're dead," she asks, "what does it matter if you didn't

marry the right person?"

"It doesn't matter. It doesn't even matter when you're alive. Keep

dancing."

"What is it, Coleman? What does matter?"
"This," he said.
"That's my boy," she replies. "Now you're learning."
"Is that what this is—you teaching me?"
"It's about time somebody did. Yes, I'm teaching you. But don't

look at me now like I'm good for something other than this. Some-
thing more than this. Don't do that. Stay here with me. Don't go.
Hold on to this. Don't think about anything else. Stay here with me.
I'll do whatever you want. How many times have you had a woman
really tell you that and mean it? I will do anything you want. Don't
lose it. Don't take it somewhere else, Coleman. This is all we're here
to do. Don't think it's about tomorrow. Close all the doors, before
and after. All the social ways of thinking, shut 'em down. Every-
thing the wonderful society is asking? The way we're set up socially?
'I should, I should, I should'? Fuck all that. What you're supposed
to be, what you're supposed to do, all that, it just kills everything. I
can keep dancing, if that's the deal. The secret little moment—if
that's the whole deal. That slice you get. That slice out of time. It's
no more than that, and I hope you know it."

"Keep dancing."
"This stuff is the important stuff," she says. "If I abandoned

thinking that..."

"What? Thinking what?"
"I was a whoring little cunt from early on."
"Were you?"

"He always told himself it wasn't him, it was me."
"The stepfather."
"Yes. That's what he told himself. Maybe he was even right. But I

had no choice at eight and nine and ten. It was the brutality that
was wrong."

"What was it like when you were ten?"
"It was like asking me to pick up the whole house and carry it on

my back."

"What was it like when the door opened at night and he came

into your room?"

"It's like when you're a child in a war. You ever see those pictures

in the paper of kids after they bomb their cities? It's like that. It's as
big as a bomb. But no matter how many times I got blown over, I
was still standing. That was my downfall: my still standing up. Then
I was twelve and thirteen and starting to get tits. I was starting to
bleed. Suddenly I was just a body that surrounded my pussy... But
stick to the dancing. All doors closed, before and after, Coleman. I
see you, Coleman. You're not closing the doors. You still have the
fantasies of love. You know something? I really need a guy older
than you. Who's had all the love-shit kicked out of him totally.
You're too young for me, Coleman. Look at you. You're just a little
boy falling in love with your piano teacher. You're falling for me,
Coleman, and you're much too young for the likes of me. I need a
much older man. I think I need a man at least a hundred. Do you
have a friend in a wheelchair you can introduce me to? Wheelchairs
are okay—I can dance and push. Maybe you have an older brother.
Look at you, Coleman. Looking at me with those schoolboy eyes.
Please, please, call your older friend. I'll keep dancing, just get him
on the phone. I want to talk to him."

And she knows, while she is saying this, that it's this and the

dancing that are making him fall in love with her. And it's so easy.
I've attracted a lot of men, a lot of pricks, the pricks find me and
they come to me, not just any man with a prick, not the ones who
don't understand, which is about ninety percent of them, but men,
young boys, the ones with the real male thing, the ones like Smoky

WHAT   MANIAC  CONCEIVED   IT?

who really understand it. You can beat yourself up over the things
you don't have, but that I've got, even fully dressed, and some guys
know it—they know what it is, and that's why they find me, and
that's why they come, but this, this, this is taking candy from a baby.
Sure—he remembers. How could he not? Once you've tasted it, you
remember. My, my. After two hundred and sixty blow jobs and four
hundred regular fucks and a hundred and six asshole fucks, the
flirtation begins. But that's the way it goes. How many times has
anyone in the world ever loved before they fucked? How many
times have I loved after I fucked? Or is this it, the groundbreaker?

"Do you want to know what I feel like?" she asks him.
"Yes."
"I feel so good."
"So," he asks, "who can get out of this alive?"
"I'm with you there, mister. You're right, Coleman. This is going

to lead to disaster. Into this at seventy-one? Turned around by this
at seventy-one? Uh-uh. We'd better go back to the raw thing."

"Keep dancing," he says, and he hits a button on the bedside Sony

and "The Man I Love" track starts up again.

"No. No. I beg you. There's my career as a janitor to think about."
"Don't stop."
"'Don't stop.'" she repeats. "I've heard those words somewhere

before." In fact, rarely has she ever heard the word "stop" without
"don't." Not from a man. Not much from herself either. "I've always
thought 'don't stop' was one word," she says.

"It is. Keep dancing."
"Then don't lose it," she says. "A man and a woman in a room.

Naked. We've got all we need. We don't need love. Don't diminish
yourself—don't reveal yourself as a sentimental sap. You're dying to
do it, but don't. Let's not lose this. Imagine, Coleman, imagine sus-
taining this."

He's never seen me dance like this, he's never heard me talk like

this. Been so long since I talked like this, I'd have thought I'd for-
gotten how. So very long in hiding. Nobody's heard me talk like this.
The hawks and the crows sometimes in the woods, but otherwise

no one. This is not the usual way I entertain men. This is the most
reckless I have ever been. Imagine.

"Imagine," she says, "showing up every day—and this. The

woman who doesn't want to own everything. The woman who
doesn't want to own anything."

But never had she wanted to own anything more.
"Most women want to own everything," she says. "They want to

own your mail. They want to own your future. They want to own
your fantasies. 'How dare you want to fuck anybody other than me.
I should be your fantasy. Why are you watching porn when you
have me at home?' They want to own who you are, Coleman. But
the pleasure isn't owning the person. The pleasure is this. Having
another contender in the room with you. Oh, I see you, Coleman. I
could give you away my whole life and still have you. Just by danc-
ing. Isn't that true? Am I mistaken? Do you like this, Coleman?"

"What luck," he says, watching, watching. "What incredible luck.

Life owed me this."

"Did it now?"
"There's no one like you. Helen of Troy."
"Helen of Nowhere. Helen of Nothing."
"Keep dancing."
"I see you, Coleman. I do see you. Do you want to know what I

see?"

"Sure."
"You want to know if I see an old man, don't you? You're afraid

I'll see an old man and I'll run. You're afraid that if I see all the dif-
ferences from a young man, if I see the things that are slack and the
things that are gone, you'll lose me. Because you're too old. But you
know what I see?"

"What?"
"I see a kid. I see you falling in love the way a kid does. And you

mustn't. You mustn't. Know what else I see?"

"Yes."
"Yes, I see it now—I do see an old man. I see an old man dying."
"Tell me."

WHAT   MANIAC  CONCEIVED   IT?

"You've lost everything."
"You see that?"
"Yes. Everything except me dancing. You want to know what I

see?"

"What?"
"You didn't deserve that hand, Coleman. That's what I see. I see

that you're furious. And that's the way it's going to end. As a furious
old man. And it shouldn't have been. That's what I see: your fury. I
see the anger and the shame. I see that you understand as an old
man what time is. You don't understand that till near the end. But
now you do. And it's frightening. Because you can't do it again. You
can't be twenty again. It's not going to come back. And this is how it
ended. And what's worse even than the dying, what's worse even
than the being dead, are the fucking bastards who did this to you.
Took it all away from you. I see that in you, Coleman. I see it
because it's something I know about. The fucking bastards who
changed everything within the blink of an eye. Took your life and
threw it away. Took your life, and they decided they were going to
throw it away. You've come to the right dancing girl. They decide
what is garbage, and they decided you're garbage. Humiliated and
humbled and destroyed a man over an issue everyone knew was
bullshit. A pissy little word that meant nothing to them, absolutely
nothing at all. And that's infuriating."

"I didn't realize you were paying attention."
She laughs the easy laugh. And dances. Without the idealism,

without the idealization, without all the utopianism of the sweet
young thing, despite everything she knows reality to be, despite the
irreversible futility that is her life, despite all the chaos and callous-
ness, she dances! And speaks as she's never spoken to a man before.
Women who fuck like she does aren't supposed to talk like this—
at least that's what the men who don't fuck women like her like
to think. That's what the women who don't fuck like her like to
think. That's what everyone likes to think—stupid Faunia. Well, let
'em. My pleasure. "Yes, stupid Faunia has been paying attention,"
she says. "How else does stupid Faunia get through? Being stupid

Faunia—that's my achievement, Coleman, that's me at my most
sensible best. Turns out, Coleman, I've been watching you dance.
How do I know this? Because you're with me. Why else would you
be with me, if you weren't so fucking enraged? And why would I be
with you, if I wasn't so fucking enraged? That's what makes for the
great fucking, Coleman. The rage that levels everything. So don't
lose it."

"Keep dancing."
"Till I drop?" she asks.
"Till you drop," he tells her. "Till the last gasp."
"Whatever you want."
"Where did I find you, Voluptas?" he says. "How did I find you?

Who are you?" he asks, tapping the button that again starts up "The
Man I Love."

"I am whatever you want."

All Coleman was doing was reading her something from the Sun-
day paper about the president and Monica Lewinsky, when Faunia
got up and shouted, "Can't you avoid the fucking seminar? Enough
of the seminar! I can't learn! I don't learn! I don't want to learn!
Stop fucking teaching me—it won't work!" And, in the midst of
their breakfast, she ran.

hates him. What does she hate most? That he really thinks his suf-
fering is a big deal. He really thinks that what everybody thinks,
what everybody says about him at Athena College, is so life-shatter-
ing. It's a lot of assholes not liking him—it's not a big deal. And for
him this is the most horrible thing that ever happened? Well, it's
not a big deal. Two kids suffocating and dying, that's a big deal.
Having your stepfather put his fingers up your cunt, that's a big
deal. Losing your job as you're about to retire isn't a big deal. That's
what she hates about him—the privilegedness of his suffering. He
thinks he never had a chance? There's real pain on this earth, and he
thinks he didn't have a chance? You know when you don't have a
chance? When, after the morning milking, he takes that iron pipe

and hits you in the head with it. I don't even see it coming—and he
didn't have a chance! Life owes him something!

What it amounts to is that at breakfast she doesn't want to be

taught. Poor Monica might not get a good job in New York City?
You know what? I don't care. Do you think Monica cares if my back
hurts from milking those fucking cows after my day at the college?
Sweeping up people's shit at the post office because they can't
bother to use the fucking garbage can? Do you think Monica cares
about that? She keeps calling the White House, and it must have
been just terrible not to have her phone calls returned. And it's over
for you? That's terrible too? It never began for me. Over before it be-
gan. Try having an iron pipe knock you down. Last night? It hap-
pened. It was nice. It was wonderful. I needed it too. But I still have
three jobs. It didn't change anything. That's why you take it when
it's happening, because it doesn't change a thing. Tell Mommy her
husband puts his fingers in you when he comes in at night—it
doesn't change a thing. Maybe now Mommy knows and she's going
to help you. But nothing changes anything. We had this night of
dancing. But it doesn't change anything. He reads to me about
these things in Washington—what, what, what does it change? He
reads to me about these escapades in Washington, Bill Clinton get-
ting his dick sucked. How's that going to help me when my car
craps out? You really think that this is the important stuff in the
world? It's not that important. It's not important at all. I had two
kids. They're dead. If I don't have the energy this morning to feel
bad about Monica and Bill, chalk it up to my two kids, all right? If
that's my shortcoming, so be it. I don't have any more left in me for
all the great troubles of the world.

The mistake was to stay there. The mistake was to fall under the

spell so completely. Even in the wildest thunderstorm, she'd driven
home. Even when she was terrified of Farley following behind and
forcing her off the road and into the river, she'd driven home. But
she stayed. Because of the dancing she stayed, and in the morning
she's angry. She's angry at him. It's a great new day, let's see what the
paper has to say. After last night he wants to see what the paper has

to say? Maybe if they hadn't talked, if they'd just had breakfast and
she'd left, staying would have been okay. But to start the seminar.
That was just about the worst thing he could have done. What
should he have done? Given her something to eat and let her go
home. But the dancing did its damage. I stayed. I stupidly stayed.
Leaving at night—there is nothing more important for a girl like
me. I'm not clear about a lot of things, but this I know: staying the
next morning, it means something. The fantasy of Coleman-and-
Faunia. It's the beginning of the indulgence of the fantasy of for-
ever, the tritest fantasy in the world. I have a place to go to, don't I?
It isn't the nicest place, but it's a place. Go to it! Fuck until all hours,
but then go. There was the thunderstorm on Memorial Day, a thun-
derstorm ripping, pounding, volleying through the hills as though
a war had broken out. The surprise attack on the Berkshires. But I
got up at three in the morning, got my clothes on, and left. The
lightning crackling, the trees splitting, the limbs crashing, the hail
raining down like shot on my head, and I left. Whipped by all that
wind, I left. The mountain is exploding, and still I left. Just between
the house and the car I could have been killed, by a bolt of lightning
ignited and killed, but I did not stay—I left. But to lie in bed with
him all night? The moon big, the whole earth silent, the moon and
moonlight everywhere, and I stayed. Even a blind man could have
found his way home on a night like that, but I did not go. And I did
not sleep. Couldn't. Awake all night. Didn't want to roll anywhere
near the guy. Didn't want to touch this man. Didn't know how, this
man whose asshole I've been licking for months. A leper till day-
break at the edge of the bed watching the shadows of his trees creep
across his lawn. He said, "You should stay," but he didn't want me
to, and I said, "I think I'll take you up on that," and I did. You could
figure on at least one of us staying tough. But no. The two of us
yielding to the worst idea ever. What the hookers told her, the
whores' great wisdom: "Men don't pay you to sleep with them.
They pay you to go home."

But even as she knows all she hates, she knows what she likes. His

generosity. So rare for her to be anywhere near anyone's generosity.

And the strength that comes from being a man who doesn't swing a
pipe at my head. If he pressed me, I'd even have to admit to him
that I'm smart. Didn't I do as much last night? He listened to me
and so I was smart. He listens to me. He's loyal to me. He doesn't re-
proach me for anything. He doesn't plot against me in any way. And
is that a reason to be so fucking mad? He takes me seriously. That is
sincere. That's what he meant by giving me the ring. They stripped
him and so he's come to me naked. In his most mortal moment. My
days have not been carpeted with men like this. He'd help me buy
the car if I let him. He'd help me buy everything if I let him. It's
painless with this man. Just the rise and fall of his voice, just hearing
him, reassures me.

Are these the things you run away from? Is this why you pick a

fight like a kid? A total accident that you even met him, your first
lucky accident—your last lucky accident—and you flare up and
run away like a kid? You really want to invite the end? To go back to
what it was before him?

But she ran, ran from the house and pulled her car out of the

barn and drove across the mountain to visit the crow at the Audu-
bon Society. Five miles on, she swung off the road onto the narrow
dirt entryway that twisted and turned for a quarter of a mile until
the gray shingled two-story house cozily appeared between the
trees, long ago a human habitat but now the society's local head-
quarters, sitting at the edge of the woods and the nature trails. She
pulled onto the gravel drive, bumping right up to the edge of the
log barrier, and parked in front of the birch with the sign nailed to
it pointing to the herb garden, hers the only car to be seen. She'd
made it. She could as easily have driven off the mountainside.
Wind chimes hanging adjacent to the entrance were tinkling in the
breeze, glassily, mysteriously, as though, without words, a religious
order were welcoming visitors to stay to meditate as well as to look
around—as though something small but touching were being
venerated here—but the flag hadn't been hoisted up the flagpole
yet, and a sign on the door said the place wasn't open on Sundays
until 1 P.M. Nonetheless, when she pushed, the door gave way and

she stepped beyond the thin morning shadow of the leafless dog-
woods and into the hallway, where large sacks heavy with different
mixes of bird feed were stacked on the floor, ready for the winter
buyers, and across from the sacks, piled up to the window along the
opposite wall, were the boxes containing the various bird feeders. In
the gift shop, where they sold the feeders along with nature books
and survey maps and audiotapes of bird calls and an assortment of
animal-inspired trinkets, there were no lights on, but when she
turned in the other direction, into the larger exhibit room, home to
the scanty collection of stuffed animals and a small assortment of
live specimens—turtles, snakes, a few birds in cages—there was one
of the staff, a chubby girl of about eighteen or nineteen, who said,
"Hi," and didn't make a fuss about the place not yet being open.
This far out on the mountain, once the autumn leaves were over,
visitors were rare enough on the first of November, and she wasn't
about to turn away someone who happened to show up at nine-
fifteen in the morning, even this woman who wasn't quite dressed
for the outdoors in the middle of fall in the Berkshire Hills but
seemed to be wearing, above her gray sweatpants, the top of a man's
striped pajamas, and on her feet nothing but backless house slip-
pers, those things called mules. Nor had her long blond hair been
brushed or combed as yet. But, all in all, she was more disheveled-
looking than dissipated, and so the girl, who was feeding mice to a
snake in a box at her feet—holding each mouse out to the snake at
the end of a pair of tongs until the snake struck and took it and
the infinitely slow process of ingestion began—just said, "Hi," and
went back to her Sunday morning duties.

The crow was in the middle cage, an enclosure about the size of a

clothes closet, between the cage holding the two saw-whet owls and
the cage for the pigeon hawk. There he was. She felt better already.

"Prince. Hey, big guy." And she clicked at him, her tongue against

her palate—click, click, click.

She turned to the girl feeding the snake. She hadn't been around

in the past when Faunia came to see the crow, and more than likely
she was new. Or relatively new. Faunia herself hadn't been to visit

the crow for months now, and not at all since she'd begun seeing
Coleman. It was a while now since she'd gone looking for ways to
leave the human race. She hadn't been a regular visitor here since
after the children died, though back then she sometimes stopped by
four or five times a week. "He can come out, can't he? He can come
just for a minute."

"Sure," the girl said.
"I'd like to have him on my shoulder," Faunia said, and stooped

to undo the hook that held shut the glass door of the cage. "Oh,
hello, Prince. Oh, Prince. Look at you."

top of the door and sat there with its head craning from side to side.

She laughed softly. "What a great expression. He's checking me

out," she called back to the girl. "Look," she said to the crow, and
showed the bird her opal ring, Coleman's gift. The ring he'd given
her in the car on that August Saturday morning that they'd driven
to Tanglewood. "Look. Come over. Come on over," she whispered
to the bird, presenting her shoulder.

But the crow rejected the invitation and jumped back into the

cage and resumed life on the perch.

"Prince is not in the mood," the girl said.
"Honey?" cooed Faunia. "Come. Come on. It's Faunia. It's your

friend. That's a boy. Come on." But the bird wouldn't move.

"If he knows that you want to get him, he won't come down," the

girl said, and, using the tongs, picked up another mouse from a tray
holding a cluster of dead mice and offered it to the snake that had,
at long last, drawn into its mouth, millimeter by millimeter, the
whole of the last one. "If he knows you're trying to get him, he usu-
ally stays out of reach, but if he thinks you're ignoring him, he'll
come down."

They laughed together at the humanish behavior.
"Okay," said Faunia, "I'll leave him alone for a moment." She

walked over to where the girl sat feeding the snake. "I love crows.
They're my favorite bird. And ravens. I used to live in Seeley Falls,
so I know all about Prince. I knew him when he was up there hang-

ing around Higginson's store. He used to steal the little girls' bar-
rettes. Goes right for anything shiny, anything colorful. He was fa-
mous for that. There used to be clippings about him from the
paper. All about him and the people who raised him after the nest
was destroyed and how he hung out like a big shot at the store.
Pinned up right there," she said, pointing back to a bulletin board
by the entryway to the room. "Where are the clippings?"

"He ripped 'em down."
Faunia burst out laughing, much louder this time than before.

"He ripped them down?"

"With his beak. Tore 'em up."
"He didn't want anybody to know his background! Ashamed of

his own background! Prince!" she called, turning back to face the
cage whose door was still wide open. "You're ashamed of your no-
torious past? Oh, you good boy. You're a good crow."

Now she took notice of one of the several stuffed animals scat-

tered on mounts around the room. "Is that a bobcat there?"

"Yeah," the girl said, waiting patiently for the snake to finish

flicking its tongue out at the new dead mouse and grab hold of it.

"Is he from around here?"
"I don't know."
"I've seen them around, up in the hills. Looked just like that one,

the one I saw. Probably is him." And she laughed again. She wasn't
drunk—hadn't even got half her coffee down when she'd run from
the house, let alone had a drink—but the laugh sounded like the
laugh of someone who'd already had a few. She was just feeling
good being here with the snake and the crow and the stuffed bob-
cat, none of them intent on teaching her a thing. None of them go-
ing to read to her from the New York Times. None of them going to
try to catch her up on the history of the human race over the last
three thousand years. She knew all she needed to know about the
history of the human race: the ruthless and the defenseless. She
didn't need the dates and the names. The ruthless and the defense-
less, there's the whole fucking deal. Nobody here was going to try to
encourage her to read, because nobody here knew how, with the ex-

WHAT  MANIAC  CONCEIVED  IT?

ception of the girl. That snake certainly didn't know how. It just
knew how to eat mice. Slow and easy. Plenty of time.

"What kind of snake is that?"
"A black rat snake."
"Takes the whole thing down."
"Yeah."
"Gets digested in the gut."
"Yeah."
"How many will it eat?"
"That's his seventh mouse. He took that one kind of slow even

for him. That might be his last."

"Every day seven?"
"No. Every one or two weeks."
"And is it let out anywhere or is that life?" she said, pointing to

the glass case from which the snake had been lifted into the plastic
carton where it was fed.

"That's it. In there."
"Good deal," said Faunia, and she turned back to look across the

room at the crow, still on its perch inside its cage. "Well, Prince, I'm
over here. And you're over there. And I have no interest in you
whatsoever. If you don't want to land on my shoulder, I couldn't
care less." She pointed to another of the stuffed animals. "What's
the guy over there?"

"That's an osprey."
She sized it up—a hard look at the sharp claws—and, again with

a biggish laugh, said, "Don't mess with the osprey."

The snake was considering an eighth mouse. "If I could only get

my kids to eat seven mice," Faunia said, "I'd be the happiest mother
on earth."

The girl smiled and said, "Last Sunday, Prince got out and was

flying around. All of the birds we have can't fly. Prince is the only
one that can fly. He's pretty fast."

"Oh, I know that," Faunia said.
"I was dumping some water and he made a beeline for the door

and went out into the trees. Within minutes there were three or

THE  HUMAN  STAIN

four crows that came. Surrounded him in the tree. And they were
going nuts. Harassing him. Hitting him on the back. Screaming.
Smacking into him and stuff. They were there within minutes. He
doesn't have the right voice. He doesn't know the crow language.
They don't like him out there. Eventually he came down to me, because
I was out there. They would have killed him."

"That's what comes of being hand-raised," said Faunia. "That's what

comes of hanging around all his life with people like us. The human
stain," she said, and without revulsion or contempt or condemnation.
Not even with sadness. That's how it is—in her own dry way, that is all
Faunia was telling the girl feeding the snake: we leave a stain, we leave
a trail, we leave our imprint. Impurity, cruelty, abuse, error,
excrement, semen—there's no other way to be here. Nothing to do
with disobedience. Nothing to do with grace or salvation or
redemption. It's in everyone. Indwelling. Inherent. Defining. The stain
that is there before its mark. Without the sign it is there. The stain so
intrinsic it doesn't require a mark. The stain that precedes disobedience,
that encompasses disobedience and perplexes all explanation and
understanding. It's why all the cleansing is a joke. A barbaric joke at
that. The fantasy of purity is appalling. It's insane. What is the quest to
purify, if not more impurity? All she was saying about the stain was that
it's inescapable. That, naturally, would be Faunia's take on it: the
inevitably stained creatures that we are. Reconciled to the horrible,
elemental imperfection. She's like the Greeks, like Coleman's Greeks.
Like their gods. They're petty. They quarrel. They fight. They hate. They
murder. They fuck. All their Zeus ever wants to do is to fuck—
goddesses, mortals, heifers, she-bears—and not merely in his own
form but, even more excitingly, as himself made manifest as beast.
To hugely mount a woman as a bull. To enter her bizarrely as a flailing
white swan. There is never enough flesh for the king of the gods or
enough perversity. All the craziness desire brings. The dissoluteness.
The depravity. The crudest pleasures. And the fury from the all-seeing
wife. Not the Hebrew God, infinitely alone, infinitely obscure,

WHAT MANIAC CONCEIVED IT?

monomaniacally the only god there is, was, and always will be, with
nothing better to do than worry about Jews. And not the perfectly
desexualized Christian man-god and his uncontaminated mother and all
the guilt and shame that an exquisite unearthliness inspires. Instead the
Greek Zeus, entangled in adventure, vividly expressive, capricious,
sensual, exuberantly wedded to his own rich existence, anything but
alone and anything but hidden. Instead the divine stain. A great reality-
reflecting religion for Faunia Farley if, through Coleman, she'd known
anything about it. As the hubristic fantasy has it, made in the image of
God, all right, but not ours—theirs. God debauched. God corrupted. A
god of life if ever there was one. God in the image of man.

"Yeah. I suppose that's the tragedy of human beings raising crows,"

the girl replied, not exactly getting Faunia's drift though not entirely
missing it either. "They don't recognize their own species. He doesn't.
And he should. It's called imprinting," the girl told her. "Prince is really
a crow that doesn't know how to be a crow."

Suddenly Prince started cawing, not in a true crow caw but in that

caw that he had stumbled on himself and that drove the other crows
nuts. The bird was out on top of the door now, practically shrieking.

Smiling temptingly, Faunia turned and said, "I take that as a

compliment, Prince."

"He imitates the schoolkids that come here and imitate him," the girl

explained. "When the kids on the school trips imitate a crow? That's his
impression of the kids. The kids do that. He's invented his own
language. From kids."

In a strange voice of her own, Faunia said, "I love that strange voice

he invented." And in the meantime she had crossed back to the cage
and stood only inches from the door. She raised her hand, the hand with
the ring, and said to the bird, "Here. Here. Look what I brought you to
play with." She took the ring off and held it up for him to examine at
close range. "He likes my opal ring."

"Usually we give him keys to play with."

THE  HUMAN   STAIN

"Well, he's moved up in the world. Haven't we all. Here. Three

hundred bucks," Faunia said. "Come on, play with it. Don't you
know an expensive ring when somebody offers it to you?"

"He'll take it," the girl said. "He'll take it inside with him. He's

like a pack rat. He'll take his food and shove it into the cracks in the
wall of his cage and pound it in there with his beak."

The crow had now grasped the ring tightly in its beak and was

jerkily moving its head from side to side. Then the ring fell to the
floor. The bird had dropped it.

Faunia bent down and picked it up and offered it to the crow

again. "If you drop it, I'm not going to give it to you. You know that.
Three hundred bucks. I'm giving you a ring for three hundred
bucks—what are you, a fancy man? If you want it, you have to take
it. Right? Okay?"

took hold of it.

"Thank you," said Faunia. "Take it inside," she whispered so that

the girl couldn't hear. "Take it in your cage. Go ahead. It's for you."

But he dropped it again.
"He's very smart," the girl called over to Faunia. "When we play

with him, we put a mouse inside a container and close it. And he
figures out how to open the container. It's amazing."

the crow took it and dropped it.

"Oh, Prince—that was deliberate. It's now a game, is it?"
Caw. Caw. Caw. Caw. Right into her face, the bird exploded with

its special noise.

Here Faunia reached up with her hand and began to stroke the

head and then, very slowly, to stroke the body downward from the
head, and the crow allowed her to do this. "Oh, Prince. Oh, so beau-
tifully shiny. He's humming to me," she said, and her voice was rap-
turous, as though she had at last uncovered the meaning of every-
thing. "He's humming" And she began to hum back, "Ewwww ...
ewwww . . . ummmmm," imitating the bird, which was indeed
making some sort of lowing sound as it felt the pressure of the

hand smoothing its back feathers. Then suddenly, click click, it was
clicking its beak. "Oh, that's good" whispered Faunia, and then she
turned her head to the girl and, with her heartiest of laughs, said,
"Is he for sale? That clicking did it. I'll take him." Meanwhile, closer
and closer she came to his clicking beak with her own lips, whisper-
ing to the bird, "Yes, I'll take you, I'll buy you—"

"He does bite, so watch your eyes," the girl said.
"Oh, I know he bites. I've already had him bite me a couple of

times. When we first met he bit me. But he clicks, too. Oh, listen to
him click, children."

Up in the room in Seeley Falls. The month after the children died,
twice tried to kill myself in that room. For all intents and purposes,
the first time I did. I know from stories the nurse told me. The stuff
on the monitor that defines a heartbeat wasn't even there. Usually
lethal, she said. But some girls have all the luck. And I tried so hard.
I remember taking the shower, shaving my legs, putting on my best
skirt, the long denim skirt. The wraparound. And the blouse from
Brattleboro that time, that summer, the embroidered blouse. I re-
member the gin and the Valium, and dimly remember this powder.
I forget the name. Some kind of rat powder, bitter, and I folded it
into the butterscotch pudding. Did I turn on the oven? Did I forget
to? Did I turn blue? How long did I sleep? When did they decide to
break down the door? I still don't know who did that. To me it was
ecstatic, getting myself ready. There are times in life worth celebrat-
ing. Triumphant times. The occasions for which dressing up was
intended. Oh, how I turned myself out. I braided my hair. I did my
eyes. Would have made my own mother proud, and that's saying
something. Called her just the week before to tell her the kids were
dead. First phone call in twenty years. "It's Faunia, Mother." "I don't
know anybody by that name. Sorry," and hung up. The bitch. After I
ran away, she told everyone, "My husband is strict and Faunia
couldn't live by the rules. She could never live by the rules." The
classic cover-up. What privileged girl-child ever ran away because a
stepfather was strict? She runs away, you bitch, because the stepfa-

THE HUMAN  STAIN

ther isn't strict—because the stepfather is wayward and won't leave
her alone. Anyway, I dressed myself in the best I owned. No less
would do. The second time I didn't dress up. And that I didn't dress
up tells the whole story. My heart wasn't in it anymore, not after the
first time didn't work. The second time it was sudden and impul-
sive and joyless. That first time had been so long in coming, days
and nights, all that anticipation. The concoctions. Buying the pow-
der. Getting prescriptions. But the second time was hurried. Unin-
spired. I think I stopped because I couldn't stand the suffocating.
My throat choking, really suffocating, not getting any air, and hur-
rying to unknot the extension cord. There wasn't any of that hur-
ried business the first time. It was calm and peaceful. The kids are
gone and there's no one to worry about and I have all the time in
the world. If only I'd done it right. The pleasure there was in it.
Finally where there is none, there is that last joyous moment, when
death should come on your own angry terms, but you don't feel an-
gry—just elated. I can't stop thinking about it. All this week. He's
reading to me about Clinton from the New York Times and all I'm
thinking about is Dr. Kevorkian and his carbon monoxide ma-
chine. Just inhale deeply. Just suck until there is no more to inhale.

"'They were such beautiful children,' he said. 'You never expect

anything like this to happen to you or your friends. At least Faunia
has the faith that her children are with God now.'"

That's what some jerk-off told the paper. 2CHILDREN SUFFO-

CATE IN LOCAL HOUSE FIRE. "'Based on the initial investiga-
tion,' Sergeant Donaldson said, 'evidence indicates that a space
heater...' Residents of the rural road said they became aware of the
fire when the children's mother..."

When the children's mother tore herself free from the cock she

was sucking.

"The father of the children, Lester Farley, emerged from the hall-

way moments later, neighbors said."

Ready to kill me once and for all. He didn't. And then I didn't.

Amazing. Amazing how nobody's done it yet to the dead children's
mother.

"No, I didn't, Prince. Couldn't make that work either. And so,"

she whispered to the bird, whose lustrous blackness beneath her
hand was warm and sleek like nothing she had ever fondled, "here
we are instead. A crow who really doesn't know how to be a crow, a
woman who doesn't really know how to be a woman. We're meant
for each other. Marry me. You're my destiny, you ridiculous bird."
Then she stepped back and bowed. "Farewell, my Prince."

And the bird responded. With a high-pitched noise that so

sounded like "Cool. Cool. Cool," that once again she broke into
laughter. When she turned to wave goodbye to the girl, she told her,
"Well, that's better than I get from the guys on the street."

And she'd left the ring. Coleman's gift. When the girl wasn't

looking, she'd hid it away in the cage. Engaged to a crow. That's the
ticket.

"Thank you," called Faunia.
"You're welcome. Have a good one," the girl called after her, and

with that, Faunia drove back to Coleman's to finish her breakfast
and see what developed with him next. The ring's in the cage. He's
got the ring. He's got a three-hundred-dollar ring.

The trip to the Moving Wall up in Pittsfield took place on Veterans
Day, when the flag is flown at half-mast and many towns hold pa-
rades—and the department stores hold their sales—and vets who
feel as Les did are more disgusted with their compatriots, their
country, and their government than on any other day of the year.
Now he was supposed to be in some two-bit parade and march
around while a band played and everyone waved the flag? Now it
was going to make everybody feel good for a minute to be recogniz-
ing their Vietnam veterans? How come they spit on him when he
came home if they were so eager to see him out there now? How
come there were veterans sleeping in the street while that draft
dodger was sleeping in the White House? Slick Willie, commander
in chief. Son of a bitch. Squeezing that Jew girl's fat tits while the VA
budget goes down the drain. Lying about sex? Shit. The goddamn
government lies about everything. No, the U.S. government had al-

ready played enough bad jokes on Lester Farley without adding on
the joke of Veterans Day.

And yet there he was, on that day of all days, driving up to

Pittsfield in Louie's van. They were headed for the half-scale replica
of the real Wall that for some fifteen years now had been touring
the country; from the tenth through the sixteenth of November, it
was to be on view in the parking lot of the Ramada Inn under the
sponsorship of the Pittsfield VFW. With him was the same crew
that had seen him through the trial of the Chinese meal. They
weren't going to let him go alone, and they'd been reassuring him
of that all along: we'll be there with you, we'll stand by you, we'll be
with you 24/7 if we need to be. Louie had gone so far as to say that
afterward Les could stay with him and his wife at their house, and,
for however long it took, they would look after him. "You won't
have to go home alone, Les, not if you don't want to. I don't think
you should try. You come stay with me and Tess. Tessie's seen it all.
Tessie understands. You don't have to worry about Tessie. When I
got back, Tessie became my motivation. My outlook was, How can
anyone tell me what to do. I'm going into a rage without any provo-
cation. You know. You know it all, Les. But thank God Tessie stead-
fastly stood by me. If you want, she'll stand by you."

Louie was a brother to him, the best brother a man could ever

hope to have, but because he would not leave him be about going to
the Wall, because he was so fucking fanatical about him seeing that
wall, Les had all he could do not to take him by the throat and
throttle the bastard. Gimpy spic bastard, leave me alone! Stop tell-
ing me how it took you ten years to get to the Wall. Stop telling me
how it fucking changed your life. Stop telling me how you made
peace with Mikey. Stop telling me what Mikey said to you at the
Wall. I don't want to know!

And yet they're off, they're on their way, and again Louie is re-

peating to him, "'It's all right, Louie'—that's what Mikey told me,
and that's what Kenny is going to tell you. What he was telling me,
Les, is that it was okay, I could get on with my life."

"I can't take it, Lou—turn around."

WHAT  MANIAC  CONCEIVED  IT?

"Buddy, relax. We're halfway there."
"Turn the fucking thing around!"
"Les, you don't know unless you go. You got to go," said Louie

kindly, "and you got to find out."

"I don't want to find out!"
"How about you take a little more of your meds? A little Ativan.

A little Valium. A little extra won't hurt. Give him some water,
Chet."

Once they reached Pittsfield and Louie had parked across the

way from the Ramada Inn, it wasn't easy getting Les out of the van.
"I'm not doin' it," he said, and so the others stood around outside
smoking, letting Les have a little more time for the extra Ativan and
Valium to kick in. From the street, Louie kept an eye on him. There
were a lot of police cars around and a lot of buses. There was a cere-
mony going on at the Wall, you could hear somebody speaking
over a microphone, some local politician, probably the fifteenth
one to sound off that morning. "The people whose names are in-
scribed on this wall behind me are your relatives, friends, and
neighbors. They are Christian, Jew, Muslim, black, white, native
people—Americans all. They gave a pledge to defend and pro-
tect, and gave their lives to keep that pledge. There is no honor,
no ceremony, that can fully express our gratitude and admiration.
The following poem was left at this wall a few weeks ago in Ohio,
and I'd like to share it with you. 'We remember you, smiling, proud,
strong / You told us not to worry / We remember those last hugs
and kisses ...'"

And when that speech was over, there was another to come. "...

but with this wall of names behind me, and as I look out into the
crowd and see the faces of middle-aged men like me, some of
them wearing medals and other remnants of a military uniform,
and I see a slight sadness in their eyes—maybe that's what's left of
the thousand-yard stare which we all picked up when we were
just brother grunts, infantrymen, ten thousand miles away from
home—when I see all this, I am somehow transported back thirty
years. This traveling monument's permanent namesake opened on

the Mall in Washington on November 13, 1982. It took me roughly
about two and a half years to get there. Looking back over that
time, I know, like many Vietnam veterans, I stayed away on pur-
pose, because of painful memories that I knew it would conjure up.
And so on a Washington evening, when dusk was settling, I went
over to the Wall by myself. I left my wife and children at the hotel—
we were on our way back from Disney World—and visited, stood
alone at its apex, close to where I'm standing right now. And the
memories came—a whirlwind of emotions came. I remembered
people I grew up with, played ball with, who are on this wall, right
here from Pittsfield. I remembered my radio operator, Sal. We met
in Vietnam. We played the where-you-from game. Massachusetts.
Massachusetts. Whereabouts in Massachusetts? West Springfield he
was from. I said I was from Pittsfield. And Sal died a month after I
left. I came home in April, and I picked up a local newspaper, and I
saw that Sal was not going to meet me in Pittsfield or Springfield
for drinks. I remembered other men I served with..."

And then there was a band—an army infantry band most likely

—playing the "Battle Hymn of the Green Berets," which led Louie
to conclude that it was best to wait till the ceremony was completely
over before getting Les out of the van. Louie had timed their arrival
so they wouldn't have to deal with the speeches or the emotional
music, but the program had more than likely started late, and so
they were still at it. Looking at his watch, though, seeing it was close
to noon, he figured it must be near the end. And, yep—suddenly
they were finishing up. The lone bugle playing taps. Just as well.
Hard enough to hear taps standing out on the street amid all the
empty buses and the cop cars, let alone to be right there, with all the
weeping people, dealing with taps and the Wall. There was taps, ag-
onizing taps, the last awful note of taps, and then the band was
playing "God Bless America," and Louie could hear the people at
the Wall singing along—"From the mountains, to the prairies, to
the oceans, white with foam"—and a moment later it was over.

Inside the van, Les was still shaking, but he didn't appear to be

looking behind him all the time and only occasionally was he look-

ing over his head for "the things," and so Louie climbed awkwardly
back up inside and sat down next to him, knowing that the whole
of Les's life was now the dread of what he was about to find out,
and so the thing to do was to get him there and get it done with.

"We're going to send Swift in advance, Les, to find Kenny for you.

It's a pretty long wall. Better than you having to go through all
those names, Swift and the guys'll go over and locate it in advance.
The names are up there on panels in the order of time. They're up
there by time, from first guy to last guy. We got Kenny's date, you
gave us the date, so it won't take too long now to find him."

"I ain't doin' it."
When Swift came back to the van, he opened the door a crack

and said to Louie, "We got Kenny. We found him."

"Okay, this is it, Lester. Suck it up. You're going to walk over

there. It's around back of the inn. There are going to be other folks
there doing the same thing we're doing. They had an official little
ceremony, but that's finished and you don't have to worry about it.
No speeches. No bullshit. It's just going to be kids and parents and
grandparents and they are all going to be doing the same thing.
They're going to be laying wreaths of flowers. They're going to
be saying prayers. Mostly they're going to be looking for names.
They're going to be talking among themselves like people do, Les.
Some of them are going to be crying. That's all that's there. So you
know just what's there. You're going to take your time but you're
coming with us."

It was unusually warm for November, and approaching the Wall

they saw that a lot of the guys were in shirtsleeves and some of the
women were wearing shorts. People wearing sunglasses in mid-No-
vember but otherwise the flowers, the people, the kids, the grand-
parents—it was exactly as Louie had described. And the Moving
Wall was no surprise: he'd seen it in magazines, on T-shirts, got a
glimpse on TV once of the real full-sized D.C. Wall before he
quickly switched off the set. Stretched the entire length of the mac-
adam parking lot were all those familiar joined panels, a perpendic-
ular cemetery of dark upright slabs sloping off gradually at either

end and stamped in white lettering with all the tightly packed
names. The name of each of the dead was about a quarter of the
length of a man's little finger. That's what it took to get them all in
there, 58,209 people who no longer take walks or go to the movies
but who manage to exist, for whatever it is worth, as inscriptions on
a portable black aluminum wall supported behind by a frame of
two-by-fours in a Massachusetts parking lot back of a Ramada Inn.

The first time Swift had been to the Wall he couldn't get out of

the bus, and the others had to drag him off and keep dragging until
they got him face to face with it, and afterward he had said, "You
can hear the Wall crying." The first time Chet had been to the
Wall he'd begun to beat on it with his fists and to scream, "That
shouldn't be Billy's name—no, Billy, no!—that there should be my
name!" The first time Bobcat had been to the Wall he'd just put out
his hand to touch it and then, as though the hand were frozen,
could not pull it away—had what the VA doctor called some type of
fit. The first time Louie had been to the Wall it didn't take him long
to figure out what the deal was and get to the point. "Okay, Mikey,"
he'd said aloud, "here I am. I'm here," and Mikey, speaking in his
own voice, had said right back to him, "It's all right, Lou. It's okay."

Les knew all these stories of what could happen the first time,

and now he is there for the first time, and he doesn't feel a thing.
Nothing happens. Everyone telling him it's going to be better,
you're going to come to terms with it, each time you come back it's
going to get better and better until we get you to Washington and
you make a tracing at the big wall of Kenny's name, and that, that is
going to be the real spiritual healing—this enormous buildup, and
nothing happens. Nothing. Swift had heard the Wall crying—Les
doesn't hear anything. Doesn't feel anything, doesn't hear anything,
doesn't even remember anything. It's like when he saw his two kids
dead. This huge lead-in, and nothing. Here he was so afraid he was
going to feel too much and he feels nothing, and that is worse. It
shows that despite everything, despite Louie and the trips to the
Chinese restaurant and the meds and no drinking, he was right all
along to believe he was dead. At the Chinese restaurant he felt

something, and that temporarily tricked him. But now he knows
for sure he's dead because he can't even call up Kenny's memory. He
used to be tortured by it, now he can't be connected to it in any way.

Because he's a first-timer, the others are kind of hovering

around. They wander off briefly, one at a time, to pay their respects
to particular buddies, but there is always someone who stays with
him to check him out, and when each guy comes back from being
away, he puts an arm around Les and hugs him. They all believe
they are right now more attuned to one another than they have ever
been before, and they all believe, because Les has the requisite
stunned look, that he is having the experience they all wanted him
to have. They have no idea that when he turns his gaze up to one of
the three American flags flying, along with the black POW/MIA
flag, over the parking lot at half-mast, he is not thinking about
Kenny or even about Veterans Day but thinking that they are flying
all the flags at half-mast in Pittsfield because it has finally been es-
tablished that Les Farley is dead. It's official: altogether dead and
not merely inside. He doesn't tell this to the others. What's the
point? The truth is the truth. "Proud of you," Louie whispers to
him. "Knew you could do it. I knew this would happen." Swift is
saying to him, "If you ever want to talk about it..."

A serenity has overcome him now that they all mistake for some

therapeutic achievement. The Wall That Heals—that's what the
sign says that's out front of the inn, and that is what it does. Fin-
ished with standing in front of Kenny's name, they're walking up
and down with Les, the whole length of the Wall and back, all of
them watching the folks searching for the names, letting Lester take
it all in, letting him know that he is where he is doing what he is do-
ing. "This is not a wall to climb, honey," a woman says quietly to a
small boy she's gathered back from where he was peering over the
low end. "What's the name? What's Steve's last name?" an elderly
man is asking his wife as he is combing through one of the panels,
counting carefully down with a finger, row by row, from the top.
"Right there," they hear a woman say to a tiny tot who can barely
walk; with one finger she is touching a name on the Wall. "Right

THE  HUMAN  STAIN

there, sweetie. That's Uncle Johnny." And she crosses herself. "You
sure that's line twenty-eight?" a woman says to her husband. "I'm
sure." "Well, he's got to be there. Panel four, line twenty-eight. I
found him in Washington." "Well, I don't see him. Let me count
again." "That's my cousin," a woman is saying. "He opened a bottle
of Coke over there, and it exploded. Booby-trapped. Nineteen years
old. Behind the lines. He's at peace, please God." There is a veteran
in an American Legion cap kneeling before one of the panels, help-
ing out two black ladies dressed in their best church clothes. "What's
his name?" he asks the younger of the two. "Bates. James." "Here he
is," the vet says. "There he is, Ma," the younger woman says.

Because the Wall is half the size of the Washington Wall, a lot of

people are having to kneel down to search for the names and, for
the older ones, that makes locating them especially hard. There are
flowers wrapped in cellophane lying up against the Wall. There is a
handwritten poem on a piece of paper that somebody has taped to
the bottom of the Wall. Louie stoops to read the words: "Star light,
star bright / First star I see tonight..." There are people with red
eyes from crying. There are vets with a black Vietnam Vet cap like
Louie's, some of them with campaign ribbons pinned to the cap.
There's a chubby boy of about ten, his back turned stubbornly to
the Wall, saying to a woman, "I don't wanna read it." There's a
heavily tattooed guy in a First Infantry Division T-shirt—"Big Red
One," the T-shirt says—who is clutching himself and wandering
around in a daze, having terrible thoughts. Louie stops, takes hold
of him, and gives him a hug. They all hug him. They even get Les to
hug him. "Two of my high school friends are on there, killed within
forty-eight hours of each other," a fellow nearby is saying. "And
both of them waked from the same funeral home. That was a sad
day at Kingston High." "He was the first one to go to Nam," some-
body else is saying, "and the only one of us to not come back. And
you know what he'd want there under his name, at the Wall there?
Just what he wanted in Nam. I'll tell you exactly: a bottle of Jack
Daniel's, a pair of good boots, and pussy hairs baked into a
brownie."

There is a group of four guys standing around talking, and when

Louie hears them going at it, reminiscing, he stops to listen, and the
others wait there with him. The four strangers are all gray-haired
men—all of them now with stray gray hair or gray curls or, in one
case, a gray ponytail poking out from back of the Vietnam Vet cap.

"You were mechanized when you were there, huh?"
"Yeah. We did a lot of humpin', but sooner or later you knew

you'd get back to that fifty."

"We did a lot of walkin'. We walked all over the freakin' Central

Highlands. All over them damn mountains."

I think out of the whole time I was there, almost eleven months,
I went to base camp when I got there and I went on R&R—that
was it."

"When the tracks were movin', they knew you were comin', and

they knew when you were going to get there, so that B-40 rocket
was sittin' there waitin'. He had a lot of time to polish it up and put
your name on it."

Suddenly Louie butts in, speaks up. "We're here," he says straight

out to the four strangers. "We're here, right? We're all here. Let me
do names. Let me do names and addresses." And he takes his note-
pad out of his back pocket and, while leaning on his cane, writes
down all their information so he can mail them the newsletter he
and Tessie publish and send out, on their own, a couple of times a
year.

Then they are passing the empty chairs. They hadn't seen them

on the way in, so intent were they on getting Les to the Wall with-
out his falling down or breaking away. At the end of the parking lot,
there are forty-one brownish-gray old metal bridge chairs, proba-
bly out of some church basement and set up in slightly arced rows,
as at a graduation or an award ceremony—three rows of ten, one
row of eleven. Great care has been taken to arrange them just so.
Taped to the backrest of each chair is somebody's name—above the
empty seat, a name, a man's name, printed on a white card. A whole
section of chairs off by itself, and, so as to be sure that nobody sits

down there, it is roped off on each of the four sides with a sagging
loop of intertwined black and purple bunting.

And a wreath is hanging there, a big wreath of carnations, and

when Louie, who doesn't miss a thing, stops to count them, he
finds, as he suspected, that the carnations number forty-one.

"What's this?" asks Swift.
"It's the guys from Pittsfield that died. It's their empty chairs,"

Louie says.

"Son of a bitch," Swift says. "What a fuckin' slaughter. Either fight

to win or don't fight at all. Son of a fuckin' bitch."

But the afternoon isn't over for them yet. Out on the pavement

in front of the Ramada Inn, there is a skinny guy in glasses, wearing
a coat much too heavy for the day, who is having a serious prob-
lem—shouting at passing strangers, pointing at them, spitting be-
cause he's shouting so hard, and there are cops rushing in from the
squad cars to try to talk him into calming down before he strikes
out at someone or, if he has a gun hidden on him, pulls it out to
take a shot. In one hand he holds a bottle of whiskey—that's all he
appears to have on him. "Look at me!" he shouts. "I'm shit and ev-
erybody who looks at me knows I'm shit. Nixon! Nixon! That's who
did it to me! That's what did it to me! Nixon sent me to Vietnam!"

Solemn as they are as they pile into the van, each bearing the

weight of his remembrances, there is the relief of seeing Les, unlike
the guy cracking up on the street, in a state of calm that never
before existed for him. Though they are not men given to express-
ing transcendent sentiments, they feel, in Les's presence, the emo-
tions that can accompany that kind of urge. During the course of
the drive home, each of them—except for Les—apprehends to the
greatest degree available to him the mystery of being alive and in
flux.

He looked serene, but that was a fakeout. He'd made up his mind.
Use his vehicle. Take them all out, including himself. Along the
river, come right at them, in the same lane, in their lane, round the
turn where the river bends.

He's made up his mind. Got nothin' to lose and everything to

gain. It isn't a matter of if that happens or if I see this or if I think
this I will do it and if I don't I won't. He's made up his mind to the
extent that he's no longer thinking. He's on a suicide mission, and
inside he is agitated big-time. No words. No thoughts. It's just see-
ing, hearing, tasting, smelling—it's anger, adrenaline, and it's resig-
nation. We're not in Vietnam. We're beyond Vietnam.

(Taken again in restraints to the Northampton VA a year later, he

tries putting into plain English for the psychologist this pure state
of something that is nothing. It's all confidential anyway. She's a
doc. Medical ethics. Strictly between the two of them. "What were
you thinking?" "No thinking." "You had to be thinking something."
"Nothing." "At what point did you get in your truck?" "After dark."
"Had you had dinner?" "No dinner." "Why did you think you were
getting into the truck?" "I knew why." "You knew where you were
going." "To get him." "To get who?" "The Jew. The Jew professor."
"Why were you going to do that?" "To get him." "Because you had
to?" "Because I had to." "Why did you have to?" "Kenny." "You were
going to kill him." "Oh yes. All of us." "There was planning, then."
"No planning." "You knew what you were doing." "Yes." "But you
did not plan it." "No." "Did you think you were back in Vietnam?"
"No Vietnam." "Were you having a flashback?" "No flashbacks."
"Did you think you were in the jungle?" "No jungle." "Did you
think you would feel better?" "No feelings." "Were you thinking
about the kids? Was this payback?" "No payback." "Are you sure?"
"No payback." "This woman, you tell me, killed your children, 'a
blow job,' you told me, 'killed my kids'—weren't you trying to get
back at her, to take revenge for that?" "No revenge." "Were you de-
pressed?" "No, no depression." "You were out to kill two people and
yourself and you were not angry?" "No, no more anger." "Sir, you
got in your truck, you knew where they would be, and you drove
into their headlights. And you're trying to tell me you weren't try-
ing to kill them." "I didn't kill them." "Who killed them?" "They
killed themselves.")

Just driving. That's all he's doing. Planning and not planning.

Knowing and not knowing. The other headlights are coming at
him, and then they're gone. No collision? Okay, no collision. Once
they swerve off the road, he changes lanes and keeps going. He just
keeps driving. Next morning, waiting with the road crew to go out
for the day, he hears about it at the town garage. The other guys al-
ready know.

There's no collision so, though he has some sense of it, he's got

no details, and when he gets home from driving and gets out of the
truck he's not sure what happened. Big day for him. November the
eleventh. Veterans Day. That morning he goes with Louie—that
morning he goes to the Wall, that afternoon he comes home from
the Wall, that night he goes out to kill everybody. Did he? Can't
know because there's no collision, but still quite a day from a thera-
peutic point of view. Second half being more therapeutic than the
first. Achieves a true serenity now. Now Kenny can speak to him.
Firing side by side with Kenny, both of them opened up on fully au-
tomatic, when Hector, the team leader, gives the screaming order
"Get your stuff and let's get out of here!" and suddenly Kenny is
dead. Quick as that. Up on some hill. Under attack, pulling back—
and Kenny's dead. Can't be. His buddy, another farm boy, same
background except from Missouri, they were going to do dairy
farming together, guy who as a kid of six watched his father die
and as a kid of nine watched his mother die, raised after that by an
uncle he loved and was always talking about, a successful dairy
farmer with a good-sized spread—180 milking cows, twelve ma-
chines milking six cows a side in the parlor at a time—and Kenny's
head is gone and he's dead.

Looks like Les is communicating with his buddy now. Showed

Kenny that Kenny's not forgotten. Kenny wanted him to do it, and
he did it. Now he knows that whatever he did—even if he's not sure
what it was—he did it for Kenny. Even if he did kill someone and he
goes to jail, it doesn't matter—it can't matter because he's dead.
This was just one last thing to do for Kenny. Squared it with him.
Knows everything is now all right with Kenny.

("I went to the Wall and there was his name and it was silence.

WHAT   MANIAC  CONCEIVED   IT?

Waited and waited and waited. I looked at him, he looked at me. I
didn't hear anything, didn't feel anything, and that's the point I
knew it wasn't okay with Kenny. That there was more to be done.
Didn't know what it was. But he wouldn't have just left me like that.
That's why there was no message for me. Because I still had more to
do for Kenny. Now? Now it's okay with Kenny. Now he can rest."
"And are you still dead?" "What are you, an asswipe? Oh, I can't talk
to you, you asswipe! I did it because I am dead!")

Next morning, first thing, he hears at the garage that she was

with the Jew in a car crash. Everybody figures that she was blowing
him and he lost control and they went off the road and through the
barrier and over the embankment and front-end-first into the shal-
lows of the river. The Jew lost control of the car.

No, he does not associate this with what happened the night be-

fore. He was just out driving, in a different state of mind entirely.

He says, "Yeah? What happened? Who killed her?"
"The Jew killed her. Went off the road."
"She was probably going down on him."
"That's what they say."
That's it. Doesn't feel anything about that either. Still feels noth-

ing. Except his suffering. Why is he suffering so much for what hap-
pened to him when she can go on giving blow jobs to old Jews? He's
the one who does the suffering, and now she just up and walks away
from it all.

Anyway, as he sips his morning coffee at the town garage, looks

that way to him.

When everybody gets up to start for the trucks, Les says, "Guess

that music won't be coming from that house on Saturday nights
anymore."

Though, as sometimes happens, nobody knows what he's talking

about, they laugh anyway, and with that, the workday begins.

If she located herself in western Massachusetts, the ad could be
traced back to her by colleagues who subscribed to the New York
Review of Books, particularly if she went on to describe her appear-

ance and list her credentials. Yet if she didn't specify her place of
residence, she could wind up with not a single response from any-
one within a radius of a hundred, two, even three hundred miles.
And since in every ad she'd studied in the New York Review, the age
given by women exceeded her own by from fifteen to thirty years,
how could she go ahead to reveal her correct age—to portray her-
self correctly altogether—without arousing the suspicion that there
was something significant undisclosed by her and wrong with her, a
woman claiming to be so young, so attractive, so accomplished
who found it necessary to look for a man through a personal ad? If
she described herself as "passionate," this might readily be inter-
preted by the lascivious-minded to be an intentional provocation,
to mean "loose" or worse, and letters would come pouring in to her
NYRB box from the men she wanted nothing to do with. But if she
appeared to be a bluestocking for whom sex was of decidedly less
importance than her academic, scholarly, and intellectual pursuits,
she would be sure to encourage a response from a type who would
be all too maidenly for someone as excitable as she could be with
an erotic counterpart she could trust. If she presented herself as
"pretty," she would be associating herself with a vague catchall cate-
gory of women, and yet if she described herself, straight out, as
"beautiful," if she dared to be truthful enough to evoke the word
that had never seemed extravagant to her lovers—who had called
her éblouissante (as in "Éblouissante! Tu as un visage de chat"); daz-
zling, stunning—or if, for the sake of precision in a text of only
thirty or so words, she invoked the resemblance noted by her elders
to Leslie Caron who her father always enjoyed making too much of,
then anyone other than a megalomaniac might be too intimidated
to approach her or refuse to take her seriously as an intellectual. If
she wrote, "A photo accompanying the letter would be welcome,"
or, simply, "Photo, please," it could be misunderstood to imply that
she esteemed good looks above intelligence, erudition, and cultural
refinement; moreover, any photos she received might be touched
up, years old, or altogether spurious. Asking for a photo might even
discourage a response from the very men whose interest she was

WHAT  MANIAC  CONCEIVED   IT?

hoping to elicit. Yet if she didn't request a photo, she could wind up
traveling all the way to Boston, to New York, or farther, to find her-
self the dinner companion of someone wholly inappropriate and
even distasteful. And distasteful not necessarily because of looks
alone. What if he was a liar? What if he was a charlatan? What if he
was a psychopath? What if he had AIDS? What if he was violent, vi-
cious, married, or on Medicare? What if he was a weirdo, someone
she couldn't get rid of? What if she gave her name and her place of
employment to a stalker? Yet, on their first meeting, how could she
withhold her name? In search of a serious, impassioned love affair
leading to marriage and a family, how could an open, honest per-
son start off by lying about something as fundamental as her name?
And what about race? Oughtn't she to include the kindly solicita-
tion "Race unimportant"? But it wasn't unimportant; it should be,
it ought to be, it well might have been but for the fiasco back in
Paris when she was seventeen that convinced her that a man of an-
other race was an unfeasible—because an unknowable—partner.

She was young and adventurous, she didn't want to be cautious,

and he was from a good family in Brazzaville, the son of a supreme
court judge—or so he said—in Paris as an exchange student for a
year at Nanterre. Dominique was his name, and she thought of him
as a fellow spiritual lover of literature. She'd met him at one of the
Milan Kundera lectures. He picked her up there, and outside they
were still basking in Kundera's observations on Madame Bovary,
infected, the both of them, with what Delphine excitedly thought
of as "the Kundera disease." Kundera was legitimatized for them
by being persecuted as a Czech writer, by being someone who had
lost out in Czechoslovakia's great historical struggle to be free.
Kundera's playfulness did not appear to be frivolous, not at all. The
Book of Laughter and Forgetting they loved. There was something
trustworthy about him. His Eastern Europeanness. The restless na-
ture of the intellectual. That everything appeared to be difficult for
him. Both were won over by Kundera's modesty, the very opposite
of superstar demeanor, and both believed in his ethos of thinking
and suffering. All that intellectual tribulation—and then there were

his looks. Delphine was very taken by the writer's poetically prize-
fighterish looks, to her an outward sign of everything colliding
within.

After the pickup at the Kundera lecture, it was completely a phys-

ical experience with Dominique, and she had never had that before.
It was completely about her body. She had just connected so much
with the Kundera lecture and she had mistaken that connection for
the connection she had to Dominique, and it happened all very
fast. There was nothing except her body. Dominique didn't under-
stand that she didn't want just sex. She wanted to be something
more than a piece of meat on a spit, turned and basted. That's what
he did—those were even his words: turning her and basting her. He
was interested in nothing else, least of all in literature. Loosen up
and shut up—that's his attitude with her, and she somehow gets
locked in, and then comes the terrible night she shows up at his
room and he is waiting there for her with his friend. It's not that
she's now prejudiced, it's just that she realizes she would not have
so misjudged a man of her own race. This was her worst failure,
and she could never forget it. Redemption had only come with
the professor who'd given her his Roman ring. Sex, yes, wonderful
sex, but sex with metaphysics. Sex with metaphysics with a man
with gravitas who is not vain. Someone like Kundera. That is the
plan.

The problem confronting her as she sat alone at the computer

long after dark, the only person left in Barton Hall, unable to leave
her office, unable to face one more night in her apartment without
even a cat for company—the problem was how to include in her
ad, no matter how subtly coded, something that essentially said,
"Whites only need apply." If it were discovered at Athena that it was
she who had specified such an exclusion—no, that would not do
for a person ascending so rapidly through the Athena academic hi-
erarchy. Yet she had no choice but to ask for a photograph, even
though she knew—knew from trying as hard as she could to think
of everything, to be naive about nothing, on the basis of just her
brief life as a woman on her own to take into account how men

could behave—that there was nothing to stop someone sufficiently
sadistic or perverse from sending a photograph designed to mislead
specifically in the matter of race.

to place an ad to help her meet a man of the caliber that she'd never
find anywhere among the faculty of as dreadfully provincial a place
as Athena. She could not do it and she should not do it, and yet all
the while she thought of the uncertainties, the outright dangers, of
advertising oneself to strangers as a woman in search of a suitable
mate, all the while she thought of the reasons why it was inadvis-
able, as chair of the Department of Languages and Literature, to
risk revealing herself to colleagues as something other than a seri-
ous teacher and scholar—exposing herself as someone with needs
and desires that, though altogether human, could be deliberately
misconstrued so as to trivialize her—she was doing it: fresh from
e-mailing every member of her department her latest thoughts on
the subject of senior theses, trying to compose an ad that adhered
to the banal linguistic formula of the standard New York Review
personal but one that managed as well to present a truthful ap-
praisal of her caliber. At it now for over an hour and she was still
unable to settle on anything unhumiliating enough to e-mail to the
paper even pseudonymously.

Western Mass. 29 yr. old petite, passionate, Parisian profes-
sor, equally at home teaching Molière as

Brainy, beautiful Berkshire academic, equally at home
cooking médaillons de veau as chairing a humanities dept.,
seeks

Serious SWF scholar seeks

SWF Yale Ph.D. Parisian-born academic. Petite, scholarly,
literature-loving, fashion-conscious brunette seeks

Attractive, serious scholar seeks

SWF Ph.D., French, Mass.-based, seeks

Seeks what? Anything, anything other than these Athena men—

the wisecracking boys, the feminized old ladies, the timorous, te-
dious family freaks, the professional dads, all of them so earnest
and so emasculated. She is revolted by the fact that they pride
themselves on doing half the domestic work. Intolerable. "Yes, I
have to go, I have to relieve my wife. I have to do as much diaper
changing as she does, you know." She cringes when they brag about
their helpfulness. Do it, fine, but don't have the vulgarity to men-
tion it. Why make such a spectacle of yourself as the fifty-fifty hus-
band? Just do it and shut up about it. In this revulsion she is very
different from her women colleagues who value these men for their
"sensitivity." Is that what overpraising their wives is, "sensitivity"?
"Oh, Sara Lee is such an extraordinary this-and-that. She's already
published four and a half articles ..." Mr. Sensitivity always has to
mention her glory. Mr. Sensitivity can't talk about some great show
at the Metropolitan without having to be sure to preface it, "Sara
Lee says ..." Either they overpraise their wives or they fall dead si-
lent. The husband falls silent and grows more and more depressed,
and she has never encountered this in any other country. If Sara Lee
is an academic who can't find a job while he, say, is barely holding
on to his job, he would rather lose his job than have her think she is
getting the bad end of the deal. There would even be a certain pride
if the situation were reversed and he was the one who had to stay
home while she didn't. A French woman, even a French feminist,
would find such a man disgusting. The Frenchwoman is intelligent,
she's sexy, she's truly independent, and if he talks more than she
does, so what, where's the issue? What's the fiery contention all
about? Not "Oh, did you notice, she's so dominated by her rude,
power-hungry husband." No, the more of a woman she is, the
more the Frenchwoman wants the man to project his power. Oh,
how she had prayed, on arriving at Athena five years back, that she
might meet some marvelous man who projected his power, and in-
stead the bulk of younger male faculty are these domestic, emascu-
lated types, intellectually unstimulating, pedestrian, the overprais-

ing husbands of Sara Lee whom she has deliciously categorized for
her correspondents in Paris as "The Diapers."

Then there are "The Hats." The Hats are the "writers in resi-

dence," America's incredibly pretentious writers in residence. Prob-
ably, at little Athena, she hasn't seen the worst of them, but these
two are bad enough. They show up to teach once a week, and they
are married and they come on to her, and they are impossible.
When can we have lunch, Delphine? Sorry, she thinks, but I am not
impressed. The thing she liked about Kundera at his lectures was
that he was always slightly shadowy, even slightly shabby some-
times, a great writer malgré lui. At least she perceived it that way
and that's what she liked in him. But she certainly does not like,
cannot stand, the American I-am-the-writer type who, when he
looks at her, she knows is thinking, With your French confidence
and your French fashions and your elitist French education, you are
very French indeed, but you are nonetheless the academic and I am
the writer—we are not equals.

These writers in residence, as far as she can surmise, spend an

enormous amount of time worrying about their headwear. Yes,
both the poet and the prose writer have an extraordinary hat fetish,
and so she categorizes them in her letters as The Hats. One of them
is always dressed as Charles Lindbergh, wearing his antique pilot
gear, and she cannot understand the relationship between pilot
gear and writing, particularly writing in residence. She muses about
this in her humorous correspondence to her Paris friends. The
other is the floppy-hat type, the unassuming type—which is, of
course, so recherché—who spends eight hours at the mirror dress-
ing carelessly. Vain, unreadable, married by now a hundred and
eighty-six times, and incredibly self-important. It's not so much
hatred she feels for this one as contempt. And yet, deep in the
Berkshires starving for romance, she sometimes feels ambivalent
about The Hats and wonders if she shouldn't take them seriously as
erotic candidates, at least. No, she couldn't, not after what she has
written to Paris. She must resist them if only because they try to

talk to her with her own vocabulary. Because one of them, the
younger, minimally less self-important one, has read Bataille, be-
cause he knows just enough Bataille and has read just enough
Hegel, she's gone out with him a few times, and never has a man so
rapidly de-eroticized himself before her eyes; with every word he
spoke—using, as he did, that language of hers that she herself is
now somewhat uncertain about—he read himself right out of her
life.

Whereas the older types, who are uncool and tweedy, "The Hu-

manists" . . . Well, obliging as she must be at conferences and in
publications to write and speak as the profession requires, the hu-
manist is the very part of her own self that she sometimes feels her-
self betraying, and so she is attracted to them: because they are
what they are and always have been and because she knows they
think of her as a traitor. Her classes have a following, but they think
of that following contemptuously, as a fashionable phenomenon.
These older men, The Humanists, the old-fashioned traditionalist
humanists who have read everything, the born-again teachers (as
she thinks of them), make her sometimes feel shallow. Her follow-
ing they laugh at and her scholarship they despise. At faculty meet-
ings they're not afraid to say what they say, and you would think
they should be; in class they're not afraid to say what they feel, and,
again, you would think they should be; and, as a result, in front of
them she crumbles. Since she doesn't herself have that much con-
viction about all the so-called discourse she picked up in Paris and
New Haven, inwardly she crumbles. Only she needs that language
to succeed. On her own in America, she needs so much to succeed!
And yet everything that it takes to succeed is somehow compromis-
ing, and it makes her feel less and less genuine, and dramatizing her
predicament as a "Faustian bargain" helps only a little.

At moments she even feels herself betraying Milan Kundera, and

so, silently, when she is alone, she will picture him in her mind's eye
and speak to him and ask his forgiveness. Kundera's intention in his
lectures was to free the intelligence from the French sophistication,
to talk about the novel as having something to do with human be-

ings and the comédie humaine; his intention was to free his students
from the tempting traps of structuralism and formalism and the
obsession with modernity, to purge them of the French theory that
they had been fed, and listening to him had been an enormous re-
lief, for despite her publications and a growing scholarly reputa-
tion, it was always difficult for her to deal with literature through
literary theory. There could be such a gigantic gap between what
she liked and what she was supposed to admire—between how she
was supposed to speak about what she was supposed to admire and
how she spoke to herself about the writers she treasured—that her
sense of betraying Kundera, though not the most serious problem
in her life, would become at times like the shame of betraying a
kindly, trusting, absent lover.

The only man she's been out with frequently is, oddly enough,

the most conservative person on campus, a divorced man of sixty-
five, Arthur Sussman, the Boston University economist who was to
have been secretary of the treasury in the second Ford administra-
tion. He is a bit stout, a bit stiff, always wearing a suit; he hates
affirmative action, he hates Clinton, he comes in from Boston once
a week, is paid a fortune, and is thought to make the place, to put
little Athena on the academic map. The women in particular are
sure she has slept with him, just because he was once powerful.
They see them occasionally having lunch together in the cafeteria.
He comes to the cafeteria and he looks so excruciatingly bored, until
he sees Delphine, and when he asks if he may join her, she says,
"How generous of you to endow us with your presence today," or
something along those lines. He likes that she mocks him, to a
point. Over lunch, they have what Delphine calls "a real conversa-
tion." With a thirty-nine-billion-dollar budget surplus, he tells her,
the government is giving nothing back to the taxpayer. The people
earned it and they should spend it, and they shouldn't have bureau-
crats deciding what to do with their money. Over lunch, he explains
in detail why Social Security should be given over to private invest-
ment analysts. Everybody should invest in their own future, he tells
her. Why should anyone trust the government to provide for peo-

pie's futures when Social Security has been giving you x returns
while anybody who had invested in the stock market over the same
period of time would now have twice as much, if not more? The
backbone of his argument is always personal sovereignty, personal
freedom, and what he never understands, Delphine dares to tell the
treasury-secretary-who-never-was, is that for most people there
isn't enough money to make choices and there isn't enough educa-
tion to make educated guesses—there isn't enough mastery of the
market. His model, as she interprets it for him, is based on a notion
of radical personal liberty that, in his thinking, is reduced to a radi-
cal sovereignty in the market. The surplus and Social Security—
those are the two issues that are bugging him, and they talk about
them all the time. He seems to hate Clinton most for proposing the
Democratic version of everything he wanted. "Good thing," he tells
her, "that little squirt Bob Reich is out of there. He'd have Clinton
spending billions of dollars retraining people for jobs they could
never occupy. Good thing he left the cabinet. At least they have Bob
Rubin there, at least they have one sane guy who knows where the
bodies are buried. At least he and Alan kept the interest rates where
they had to be. At least he and Alan kept this recovery going..."

The one thing she likes about him is that, aside from his gruff in-

sider's take on economic issues, he happens also to know all of
Engels and Marx really well. More impressive, he knows intimately
their The German Ideology, a text she has always found fascinating
and loves. When he takes her out to dinner down in Great Barring-
ton, things turn both more romantic and more intellectual than
they do at lunch in the cafeteria. Over dinner he likes to speak
French with her. One of his conquests years ago was Parisian, and
he goes on endlessly about this woman. Delphine does not, how-
ever, open her mouth like a fish when he talks about his Parisian af-
fair or about his manifold sentimental attachments before and af-
ter. About women he brags constantly, in a very suave way that she
doesn't, after a while, find suave at all. She cannot stand the fact that
he thinks she's impressed by all his conquests, but she puts up with
it, only slightly bored, because otherwise she's glad to be having

WHAT   MANIAC  CONCEIVED   IT?

dinner with an intelligent, assertive, well-read man of the world.
When at dinner he takes her hand, she says something to let him
know, however subtly, that if he thinks he is going to sleep with her,
he is crazy. Sometimes in the parking lot, he pulls her to him by
cupping her behind and holding her against him. He says, "I cannot
be with you time after time like this without some passion. I can't
take out a woman as beautiful as you, talk to her and talk to her and
talk to her, and have it end there." "We have a saying in France," she
tells him, "which is ..." "Which is what?" he asks, thinking he may
pick up a new bon mot in the bargain. Smiling, she says, "I don't
know. It'll come to me later," and in this way gently disentangles
herself from his surprisingly strong arms. She is gentle with him
because it works, and she is gentle with him because she knows he
thinks it is a question of age, when in fact it is a question, as she ex-
plains to him driving back in his car, of nothing so banal: it is a
question of "a frame of mind." "It's about who I am," she tells him,
and, if nothing else has done it, that sends him away for two or
three months, until he next turns up in the cafeteria, looking to see
if she is there. Sometimes he telephones her late at night or in the
early hours of the morning. From his Back Bay bed, he wants to talk
with her about sex. She says she prefers to talk about Marx, and it
takes no more, with this conservative economist, to put a stop to
that stuff. And yet the women who don't like her are all sure that
because he's powerful she has slept with him. It is incomprehensi-
ble to them that, bleak and lonely as her life is, she has no interest in
becoming Arthur Sussman's little badge of a mistress. It has also
gotten back to her that one of them has called her "so passe, such
a parody of Simone de Beauvoir." By which she means that it is
her judgment that Beauvoir sold out to Sartre—a very intelligent
woman but in the end his slave. For these women, who observe her
at lunch with Arthur Sussman and get it all wrong, everything is an
issue, everything is an ideological stance, everything is a betrayal—
everything's a selling out. Beauvoir sold out, Delphine sold out, et
cetera, et cetera. Something about Delphine makes them go green
in the face.

Another of her problems. She does not want to alienate these

women. Yet she is no less philosophically isolated from them than
from the men. Though it would not be prudent for her to tell them
so, the women are far more feminist, in the American sense, than
she is. It would not be prudent because they are dismissive enough
and seem always to know where she stands anyway, always suspect-
ing her motives and aims: she is attractive, young, thin, effortlessly
stylish, she has climbed so high so fast she already has the begin-
nings of a reputation beyond the college, and, like her Paris friends,
she doesn't use or need to use all their cliches (the very clichés by
which The Diapers are so eagerly emasculated). Only in the anony-
mous note to Coleman Silk did she adopt their rhetoric, and that
was not only accidental, because she was so overwrought, but, in
the end, deliberate, to hide her identity. In truth, she is no less
emancipated than these Athena feminists are and perhaps even
more: she left her own country, daringly left France, she works hard
at her job, she works hard at her publications, and she wants to
make it; on her own as she is, she has to make it. She is utterly alone,
unsupported, homeless, decountried—dépaysée. In a free state but
oftentimes so forlornly dépaysée. Ambitious? She happens to be
more ambitious than all those staunch go-it-alone feminists put to-
gether, but because men are drawn to her, and among them is a
man as eminent as Arthur Sussman, and because, for the fun of it,
she wears a vintage Chanel jacket with tight jeans, or a slip dress in
summer, and because she likes cashmere and leather, the women
are resentful. She makes it a point not to be concerned with their
ghastly clothing, so by what right do they dwell on what they con-
sider recidivist about hers? She knows everything they say in their
annoyance with her. They say what the men she begrudgingly re-
spects are saying—that she's a charlatan and illegitimate—and that
makes it hurt more. They say, "She is fooling the students." They
say, "How can the students not see through this woman?" They say,
"Don't they see that she is one of those French male chauvinists in
drag?" They say that she got to be the department chair faute de
mieux. And they make fun of her language. "Well, of course, it's her

WHAT  MANIAC  CONCEIVED   IT?

intertextual charm that's gotten her her following. It's her relation-
ship to phenomenology. She's such a phenomenologist ha-ha-ha!"
She knows what they are saying to ridicule her, and yet she remem-
bers being in France and being at Yale and living for this vocabu-
lary; she believes that to be a good literary critic she has to have
this vocabulary. She needs to know about intertextuality. Does that
mean she's a phony? No! It means that she's unclassifiable. In some
circles that might be thought of as her mystique! But just be the
least bit unclassifiable at a backwoods hellhole like this place, and
that annoys everyone. Her being unclassifiable even annoys Arthur
Sussman. Why the hell won't she at least have phone sex? Be unclas-
sifiable here, be something they cannot reconcile, and they torment
you for it. That being unclassifiable is a part of her bildungsroman,
that she has always thrived on being unclassifiable, nobody at
Athena understands.

There is a cabal of three women—a philosophy professor, a soci-

ology professor, and a history professor—who particularly drive
her crazy. Full of animosity toward her simply because she is not
ploddingly plugged in the way they are. Because she has an air of
chic, they feel she hasn't read enough learned journals. Because
their American notions of independence differ from her French
notions of independence, she is dismissed by them as pandering to
powerful males. But what has she ever actually done to arouse their
distrust, except perhaps handle the men on the faculty as well as she
does? Yes, she'd been at dinner in Great Barrington with Arthur
Sussman. Does that mean she didn't consider herself his intellec-
tual equal? There's no question in her mind that she is his equal.
She isn't flattered to be out with him—she wants to hear what he
has to say about The German Ideology. And hadn't she first tried to
have lunch with the three of them, and could they have been any
more condescending? Of course, they don't bother to read her
scholarship. None of them reads anything she's written. It's all
about perception. All they see is Delphine using what she under-
stands they sarcastically call "her little French aura" on all the ten-
ured men. Yet she is strongly tempted to court the cabal, to tell

THE  HUMAN   STAIN

them in so many words that she doesn't like the French aura—if she
did, she'd be living in France! And she doesn't own the tenured
men—she doesn't own anyone. Why else would she be by herself,
the only person at the desk of a Barton Hall office at ten o'clock at
night? Hardly a week goes by when she doesn't try and fail with the
three who drive her nuts, who baffle her most, but whom she can-
not charm, finesse, or engage in any way. "Les Trois Grâces" she calls
them in her letters to Paris, spelling "grâces" maliciously "grasses"
The Three Greaseballs. At certain parties—parties that Delphine
doesn't really want to be at—Les Trois Grasses are invariably pres-
ent. When some big feminist intellectual comes along, Delphine
would at least like to be invited, but she never is. She can go to the
lecture but she's never asked to the dinner. But the infernal trio who
call the shots, they are always there.

In imperfect revolt against her Frenchness (as well as being ob-

sessed with her Frenchness), lifted voluntarily out of her country (if
not out of herself), so ensnared by the disapproval of Les Trois
Grasses as to be endlessly calculating what response might gain her
their esteem without further obfuscating her sense of herself and
misrepresenting totally the inclinations of the woman she once
naturally was, at times destabilized to the point of shame by the
discrepancy between how she must deal with literature in order
to succeed professionally and why she first came to literature,
Delphine, to her astonishment, is all but isolated in America. De-
countried, isolated, estranged, confused about everything essential
to a life, in a desperate state of bewildered longing and surrounded
on all sides by admonishing forces defining her as the enemy. And
all because she'd gone eagerly in search of an existence of her own.
All because she'd been courageous and refused to take the pre-
scribed view of herself. She seemed to herself to have subverted
herself in the altogether admirable effort to make herself. There is
something very mean about life that it should have done this to her.
At its heart, very mean and very vengeful, ordering a fate not ac-
cording to the laws of logic but to the antagonistic whim of perver-
sity. Dare to give yourself over to your own vitality, and you might

as well be in the hands of a hardened criminal. I will go to America
and be the author of my life, she says; I will construct myself out-
side the orthodoxy of my family's given, I will fight against the
given, impassioned subjectivity carried to the limit, individualism
at its best—and she winds up instead in a drama beyond her con-
trol. She winds up as the author of nothing. There is the drive to
master things, and the thing that is mastered is oneself.
Why should it be so impossible just to know what to do?

Delphine would be entirely isolated if not for the department

secretary, Margo Luzzi, a mousy divorcée in her thirties, also lonely,
wonderfully competent, shy as can be, who will do anything for
Delphine and sometimes eats her sandwich in Delphine's office and
who has wound up as the chairperson's only adult woman friend at
Athena. Then there are the writers in residence. They appear to like
in her exactly what the others hate. But she cannot stand them.
How did she get in the middle like this? And how does she get out?
As it does not offer any solace to dramatize her compromises as a
Faustian bargain, so it isn't all that helpful to think of her in-the-
middleness, as she tries to, as a "Kunderian inner exile."

Seeks. All right then, seeks. Do as the students say—Go for it!
Youthful, petite, womanly, attractive, academically successful SWF
French-born scholar, Parisian background, Yale Ph.D., Mass.-
based, seeks ... ? And now just lay it on the line. Do not hide from
the truth of what you are and do not hide from the truth of what
you seek. A stunning, brilliant, hyperorgasmic woman seeks . . .
seeks... seeks specifically and uncompromisingly what?
She wrote now in a rush.

Mature man with backbone. Unattached. Independent. Witty.

Lively. Defiant. Forthright. Well educated. Satirical spirit. Charm.
Knowledge and love of great books. Well spoken and straight-
speaking. Trimly built. Five eight or nine. Mediterranean complex-
ion. Green eyes preferred. Age unimportant. But must be intellec-
tual. Graying hair acceptable, even desirable...
And then, and only then, did the mythical man being summoned

forth in all earnestness on the screen condense into a portrait of
someone she already knew. Abruptly she stopped writing. The exer-
cise had been undertaken only as an experiment, to try loosening
the grip of inhibition just a little before she renewed her effort to
compose an ad not too diluted by circumspection. Nonetheless,
she was astonished by what she'd come up with, by whom she'd
come up with, in her distress wanting nothing more than to delete
those forty-odd useless words as quickly as possible. And
thinking, too, of the many reasons, including her shame, for her to
accept defeat as a blessing and forgo hope of solving her in-the-
middleness by participating in such an impossibly compromising
scheme ... Thinking that if she had stayed in France she wouldn't
need this ad, wouldn't need an ad for anything, least of all to find a
man... Thinking that coming to America was the bravest thing she
had ever done, but that how brave she couldn't have known at the
time. She just did it as the next step of her ambition, and not a
crude ambition either, a dignified ambition, the ambition to be in-
dependent, but now she's left with the consequences. Ambition.
Adventure. Glamour. The glamour of going to America. The supe-
riority. The superiority of leaving. Left for the pleasure of one day
coming home, having done it, of returning home triumphant. Left
because I wanted to come home one day and have them say—what
is it that I wanted them to say? "She did it. She did that. And if she
did that, she can do anything. A girl who weighs a hundred and
four pounds, barely five foot two, twenty years old, on her own,
went there on her own with a name that didn't mean anything to
anybody, and she did it. Self-made. Nobody knew her. Made her-
self." And who was it that I wanted to have said it? And if they had,
what difference would it make? "Our daughter in America ..." I
wanted them to say, to have to say, "She made it on her own in
America." Because I could not make a French success, a real success,
not with my mother and her shadow over everything—the shadow
of her accomplishments but, even worse, of her family, the shadow
of the Walincourts, named for the place given to them in the thir-
teenth century by the king Saint Louis and conforming still to

WHAT  MANIAC  CONCEIVED  IT?

the family ideals as they were set in the thirteenth century. How
Delphine hated all those families, the pure and ancient aristocracy
of the provinces, all of them thinking the same, looking the same,
sharing the same stifling values and the same stifling religious obe-
dience. However much ambition they have, however much they
push their children, they bring their children up to the same litany
of charity, selflessness, discipline, faith, and respect—respect not
for the individual (down with the individual!) but for the traditions
of the family. Superior to intelligence, to creativity, to a deep devel-
opment of oneself apart from them, superior to everything, were
the traditions of the stupid Walincourts! It was Delphine's mother
who embodied those values, who imposed them on the household,
who would have enchained her only daughter to those values from
birth to the grave had her daughter been without the strength,
from adolescence on, to run from her as far as she could. The
Walincourt children of Delphine's generation either fell into ab-
solute conformity or rebelled so gruesomely they were incompre-
hensible, and Delphine's success was to have done neither. From a
background few ever even begin to recover from, Delphine had
managed a unique escape. By coming to America, to Yale, to
Athena, she had, in fact, surpassed her mother, who couldn't her-
self have dreamed of leaving France—without Delphine's father
and his money, Catherine de Walincourt could hardly dream, at
twenty-two, of leaving Picardy for Paris. Because if she left Picardy
and the fortress of her family, who would she be? What would her
name mean? I left because I wanted to have an accomplishment
that nobody could mistake, that had nothing to do with them, that
was my own ... Thinking that the reason she can't get an American
man isn't that she can't get an American man, it's that she can't un-
derstand these men and that she will never understand these men,
and the reason she can't understand these men is because she is not
fluent. With all her pride in her fluency, with all her fluency, she is
not fluent! I think I understand them, and I do understand; what I
don't understand isn't what they say, it's everything they don't say,
everything they're not saying. Here she operates at fifty percent of

THE HUMAN STAIN

her intelligence, and in Paris she understood every nuance. What's
the point of being smart here when, because I am not from here, I
am de facto dumb ... Thinking that the only English she really un-
derstands—no, the only American she understands—is academic
American, which is hardly American, which is why she can't make
it in, will never make it in, which is why there'll never be a man,
why this will never be her home, why her intuitions are wrong and
always will be, why the cozy intellectual life she had in Paris as a
student will never be hers again, why for the rest of her life she is
going to understand eleven percent of this country and zero per-
cent of these men ... Thinking that all her intellectual advantages
have been muted by her being dépaysée . . . Thinking that she has
lost her peripheral vision, that she sees things that are in front of
her but nothing out of the corner of her eye, that what she has here
is not the vision of a woman of her intelligence but a flat, a totally
frontal vision, the vision of an immigrant or a displaced person, a
misplaced person ... Thinking, Why did I leave? Because of my
mother's shadow? This is why I gave up everything that was mine,
everything that was familiar, everything that had made me a subtle
being and not this mess of uncertainty that I've become. Everything
that I loved I gave up. People do that when their countries are im-
possible to live in because the fascists have taken charge but not be-
cause of their mother's shadow . . . Thinking, Why did I leave, what
have I done, this is impossible. My friends, our talk, my city, the
men, all the intelligent men. Confident men I could converse with.
Mature men who could understand. Stable, passionate, masculine
men. Strong, unintimidated men. Men legitimately and unambigu-
ously men .. . Thinking, Why didn't somebody stop me, why didn't
somebody say something to me? Away from home for less than ten
years and it feels like two lifetimes already .. . Thinking that she's
Catherine de Walincourt Roux's little daughter still, that she has
not changed that by one iota. . . Thinking that being French in
Athena may have made her exotic to the natives, but it hasn't made
her anything more extraordinary to her mother and it never will...
Thinking, yes, that's why she left, to elude her mother's fixed-

WHAT MANIAC CONCEIVED IT?

forever overshadowing shadow, and that's what blocks her return,
and now she's exactly nowhere, in the middle, neither there nor
here ... Thinking that under her exotic Frenchness she is to herself
who she always was, that all the exotic Frenchness has achieved in
America is to make of her the consummate miserable misunder-
stood foreigner... Thinking that she's worse even than in the
middle—that she's in exile, in, of all things, a stupid-making, self-
imposed anguishing exile from her mother—Delphine neglects to
observe that earlier, at the outset, instead of addressing the ad to the
New York Review of Books, she had automatically addressed it to the
recipients of her previous communication, the recipients of most
of her communications—to the ten staff members of the Athena
Department of Languages and Literature. She neglects first to ob-
serve that mistake and then, in her distracted, turbulent, emotion-
ally taxing state, neglects also to observe that instead of hitting the
delete button, she is adding one common-enough tiny error to
another common-enough tiny error by hitting the send button in-
stead. And so off, irretrievably off goes the ad in quest of a Cole-
man Silk duplicate or facsimile, and not to the classified section
of the New York Review of Books but to every member of her de-
partment.

It was past 1 A.M. when the phone rang. She had long ago fled her
office—run from her office thinking only to get. her passport and
flee the country—and it was already several hours after her regular
bedtime, when the phone rang with the news. So anguished was she
by the ad's inadvertently going out as e-mail that she was still awake
and roaming her apartment, tearing at her hair, sneering in the
mirror at her' face, bending her head to the kitchen table to weep
into her hands, and, as though startled out of sleep—the sleep of a
heretofore meticulously defended adult life—jumping up to cry
aloud, "It did not happen! I did not do it!" But who had ? In
the past there seemed always to be people trying their best to tram-
ple her down, to dispose somehow of the nuisance she was to them,
callous people against whom she had learned the hard way to pro-

tect herself. But tonight there was no one to reproach: her own
hand had delivered the ruinous blow.

Frantic, in a frenzy, she tried to figure out some way, any way, to

prevent the worst from happening, but in her state of incredulous
despair she could envision the inevitability of only the most cata-
clysmic trajectory: the hours passing, the dawn breaking, the doors
to Barton Hall opening, her departmental colleagues each entering
his or her office, booting up the computer, and finding there, to sa-
vor with their morning coffee, the e-mail ad for a Coleman Silk du-
plicate that she'd had no intention of ever sending. To be read once,
twice, three times over by all the members of her department and
then to be e-mailed down the line to every last instructor, professor,
administrator, office clerk, and student.

Everyone in her classes will read it. Her secretary will read it. Be-

fore the day is out, the president of the college will have read it, and
the college trustees. And even if she were to claim that the ad had
been meant as a joke, nothing more than an insider's joke, why
would the trustees allow the joke's perpetrator to remain at Athena?
Especially after her joke is written up in the student paper, as it
will be. And in the local paper. After it is picked up by the French
papers.

Her mother! The humiliation for her mother! And her father!

The disappointment to him! All the conformist Walincourt cous-
ins—the pleasure they will take in her defeat! All the ridiculously
conservative uncles and the ridiculously pious aunts, together
keeping intact the narrowness of the past—how this will please
them as they sit snobbishly side by side in church! But suppose
she explained that she had merely been experimenting with the ad
as a literary form, alone at the office disinterestedly toying with
the personal ad as ... as utilitarian haiku. Won't help. Too ridic-
ulous. Nothing will help. Her mother, her father, her brothers,
her friends, her teachers. Yale. Yale! News of the scandal will reach
everyone she's ever known, and the shame will follow her unflag-
gingly forever. Where can she even run with her passport? Mon-
treal? Martinique? And earn her living how? No, not in the farthest

Francophone outpost will she be allowed to teach once they learn
of her ad. The pure, prestigious professional life for which she had
done all this planning, all this grueling work, the untainted, irre-
proachable life of the mind . . . She thought to phone Arthur
Sussman. Arthur will figure a way out for her. He can pick up the
phone and talk to anyone. He's tough, he's shrewd, in the ways of
the world the smartest, most influential American she knows. Pow-
erful people like Arthur, however upright, are not boxed in by the
need to always be telling the truth. He'll come up with what it takes
to explain everything. He'll figure out just what to do. But when she
tells him what has happened, why will he think to help her? All he'll
think is that she liked Coleman Silk more than she liked him. His
vanity will do his thinking for him and lead him to the stupidest
conclusion. He'll think what everyone will think: that she is pining
for Coleman Silk, that she is dreaming not of Arthur Sussman, let
alone of The Diapers or The Hats, but of Coleman Silk. Imagining
her in love with Coleman Silk, he'll slam down the phone and never
speak to her again.

To recapitulate. To go over what's happened. To try to gain suf-

ficient perspective to do the rational thing. She didn't want to send
it. She wrote it, yes, but she was embarrassed to send it and didn't
want to send it and she didn't send it—yet it went. The same with
the anonymous letter—she didn't want to send it, carried it to New
York with no intention of ever sending it, and it went. But what's
gone off this time is much, much worse. This time she's so desper-
ate that by twenty after one in the morning the rational thing is to
telephone Arthur Sussman regardless of what he thinks. Arthur has
to help her. He has to tell her what she can do to undo what she's
done. And then, at exactly twenty past one, the phone she holds in
her hand to dial Arthur Sussman suddenly begins to ring. Arthur
calling her!

But it is her secretary. "He's dead," Margo says, crying so hard

that Delphine can't be quite sure what she's hearing. "Margo—are
you all right?" "He's dead!" "Who is?" "I just heard. Delphine. It's
terrible. I'm calling you, I have to, I have to call you. I have to tell

you something terrible. Oh, Delphine, it's late, I know it's late—"
"No! Not Arthur!" Delphine cries. "Dean Silk!" Margo says. "Is
dead?" "A terrible crash. It's too horrible." "What crash? Margo,
what has happened? Where? Speak slowly. Start again. What are
you telling me?" "In the river. With a woman. In his car. A crash."
Margo is by now unable to be at all coherent, while Delphine is so
stunned that, later, she does not remember putting down the re-
ceiver or rushing in tears to her bed or lying there howling his
name.

She put down the receiver, and then she spent the worst hours of

her life.

Because of the ad they'll think she liked him? They'll think she

loved him because of the ad? But what would they think if they saw
her now, carrying on like the widow herself? She cannot close her
eyes, because when she does she sees his eyes, those green staring
eyes of his, exploding. She sees the car plunge off the road, and his
head is shooting forward, and in the instant of the crash, his eyes
explode. "No! No!" But when she opens her eyes to stop seeing his
eyes, all she sees is what she's done and the mockery that will ensue.
She sees her disgrace with her eyes open and his disintegration with
her eyes shut, and throughout the night the pendulum of suffering
swings her from one to the other.

went to sleep. She can't remember why she is shaking. She thinks
she is shaking from a nightmare. The nightmare of his eyes explod-
ing. But no, it happened, he's dead. And the ad—it happened. Ev-
erything has happened, and nothing's to be done. I wanted them to
say . . . and now they'll say, "Our daughter in America? We don't
talk about her. She no longer exists for us." When she tries to com-
pose herself and settle on a plan of action, no thinking is possible:
only the derangement is possible, the spiraling obtuseness that is
terror. It is just after 5 A.M. She closes her eyes to try to sleep and
make it all go away, but the instant her eyes are shut, there are his
eyes. They are staring at her and then they explode.

She is dressing. She is screaming. She is walking out her door and

it's barely dawn. No makeup. No jewelry. Just her horrified face.
Coleman Silk is dead.

When she reaches the campus there's no one there. Only crows.

It's so early the flag hasn't yet been raised. Every morning she looks
for it atop North Hall, and every morning, upon seeing it, there is
the moment of satisfaction. She left home, she dared to do it—she
is in America! There is the contentment with her own courage and
the knowledge that it hasn't been easy. But the American flag's not
there, and she doesn't see that it's not. She sees nothing but what
she must do.

office. She's done that much. She's hanging on. She's thinking now.
Okay. But how does she get into their offices to get at their comput-
ers? It's what she should have done last night instead of running
away in a panic. To regain her self-possession, to rescue her name,
to forestall the disaster of ruining her career, she must continue to
think. Thinking has been her whole life. What else has she been
trained to do from the time she started school? She leaves her office
and walks down the corridor. Her aim is clear now, her thinking de-
cisive. She will just go in and delete it. It is her right to delete it—
she sent it. And she did not even do that. It was not intentional.
She's not responsible. It just went. But when she tries the handle of
each of the doors, they are locked. Next she tries working her keys
into the locks, first her key to the building, then the key to her
office, but neither works. Of course they don't work. They wouldn't
have worked last night and they don't work now. As for thinking,
were she able to think like Einstein, thinking will not open these
doors.

Her c.v. Why look for her c.v.? It is the end of her c.v. It is the end of
our daughter in America. And because it is the end, she pulls all
the hanging files out of the drawer and hurls them on the floor.
Empties the entire drawer. "We have no daughter in America. We
have no daughter. We have only sons." Now she does not try to
think that she should think. Instead, she begins throwing things.

Whatever is piled on her desk, whatever is decorating her walls—
what difference does it make what breaks? She tried and she failed.
It is the end of the impeccable resume and of the veneration of the
résumé. "Our daughter in America failed."

She is sobbing when she picks up the phone to call Arthur. He

will jump out of bed and drive straight from Boston. In less than
three hours he'll be in Athena. By nine o'clock Arthur will be here!
But the number she dials is the emergency number on the decal
pasted to the phone. And she had no more intention of dialing that
number than of sending the two letters. All she had was the very
human wish to be saved.

She cannot speak.
"Hello?" says the man at the other end. "Hello? Who is this?"
She barely gets it out. The most irreducible two words in any lan-

guage. One's name. Irreducible and irreplaceable. All that is her.
Was her. And now the two most ridiculous words in the world.

"Who? Professor who? I can't understand you, Professor."
"Security?"
"Speak louder, Professor. Yes, yes, this is Campus Security."
"Come here," she says pleadingly, and once again she is in tears.

"Right away. Something terrible has happened."

"Professor? Where are you? Professor, what's happened?"
"Barton." She says it again so he can understand. "Barton 121,"

she tells him. "Professor Roux."

"What is it, Professor?
"Something terrible."
"Are you all right? What's wrong? What is it? Is somebody there?"
"I'm here."
"Is everything all right?"
"Someone broke in."
"Broke in where?"
"My office."
"When? Professor, when?"
"I don't know. In the night. I don't know."

WHAT  MANIAC  CONCEIVED   IT?

"You okay? Professor? Professor Roux? Are you there? Barton

Hall? You sure?"

The hesitation. Trying to think. Am I sure? Am I? "Absolutely,"

she says, sobbing uncontrollably now. "Hurry, please! Get here im-
mediately, please! Someone broke into my office! It's a shambles! It's
awful! It's horrible! My things! Someone broke into my computer!
Hurry!"

"A break-in? Do you know who it was? Do you know who broke

in? Was it a student?"

"Dean Silk broke in," she said. "Hurry!"
"Professor—Professor, are you there? Professor Roux, Dean Silk

is dead."

"I've heard," she said, "I know, it's awful," and then she screamed,

screamed at the horror of all that had happened, screamed at the
thought of the very last thing he had ever done, and to her, to her—
and after that, Delphine's day was a circus.

The astonishing news of Dean Silk's death in a car crash with an
Athena college janitor had barely reached the last of the college's
classrooms when word began to spread of the pillaging of Delphine
Roux's office and the e-mail hoax Dean Silk had attempted to per-
petrate only hours before the fatal crash. People were having trou-
ble enough believing all of this, when another story, one about the
circumstances of the crash, spread from town up to the college, fur-
ther confounding just about everybody. For all its atrocious details,
the story was said to have originated with a reliable source: the
brother of the state trooper who had found the bodies. According
to his story, the reason the dean lost control of his car was because,
from the passenger seat beside him, the Athena woman janitor was
satisfying him while he drove. This the police were able to infer
from the disposition of his clothing and the position of her body
and its location in the vehicle when the wreckage was discovered
and pulled from the river.

Most of the faculty, particularly older professors who had known

Coleman Silk personally for many years, refused at first to believe
this story, and were outraged by the gullibility with which it was
being embraced as incontrovertible truth—the cruelty of the insult
appalled them. Yet as the day progressed and additional facts
emerged about the break-in, and still more came out about Silk's
affair with the janitor—reports from numerous people who had
seen them sneaking around together—it became increasingly dif-
ficult for the elders of the faculty "to remain"—as the local paper
noted the next day in its human interest feature—"heartbreakingly
in denial."

lier, no one had wanted to believe that he had called two of his
black students spooks; when they remembered how after resigning
in disgrace he had isolated himself from his former colleagues, how
on the rare occasions when he was seen in town he was abrupt to
the point of rudeness with whoever happened to run into him;
when they remembered that in his vociferous loathing of every-
thing and everyone having to do with Athena he was said to have
managed to estrange himself from his own children ... well, even
those who had begun the day dismissing any suggestion that Cole-
man Silk's life could have come to so hideous a conclusion, the old-
timers who found it unendurable to think of a man of his intellec-
tual stature, a charismatic teacher, a dynamic and influential dean,
a charming, vigorous man still hale and hearty in his seventies and
the father of four grown, wonderful kids, as forsaking everything
he'd once valued and sliding so precipitously into the scandalous
death of an alienated, bizarre outsider—even those people had to
face up to the thoroughgoing transformation that had followed
upon the spooks incident and that had not only brought Coleman
Silk to his mortifying end but led as well—led inexcusably—to the
gruesome death of Faunia Farley, the hapless thirty-four-year-old
illiterate whom, as everyone now knew, he had taken in old age as
his mistress.

The Purifying Ritual

TWO FUNERALS.

Faunia's first, up at the cemetery on Battle Mountain, always for

me an unnerving place to drive by, creepy even in daylight, with its
mysteries of ancient gravestone stillness and motionless time, and
rendered all the more ominous by the state forest preserve that
abuts what was originally an Indian burial ground—a vast, densely
wooded, boulder-strewn wilderness veined with streams glassily
cascading from ledge to ledge and inhabited by coyote, bobcat, even
black bear, and by foraging deer herds said to abound in huge,
precolonial numbers. The women from the dairy farm had pur-
chased Faunia's plot at the very edge of the dark woods and orga-
nized the innocent, empty graveside ceremony. The more outgoing
of the two, the one who identified herself as Sally, delivered the first
of the eulogies, introducing her farming partner and their children,
then saying, "We all lived with Faunia up at the farm, and why we're
here this morning is why you're here: to celebrate a life."

She spoke in a bright, ringing voice, a smallish, hearty, round-

faced woman in a long sack dress, buoyantly determined to keep to
a perspective that would cause the least chagrin among the six
farm-reared children, each neatly dressed in his or her best clothes,
each holding a fistful of flowers to be strewn on the coffin before it
was lowered into the ground.

THE   HUMAN   STAIN

"Which of us," Sally asked, "will ever forget that big, warm laugh

of hers? Faunia could have us in stitches as much from the infec-
tiousness of her laugh as from some of the things she could come
out with. And she was also, as you know, a deeply spiritual person.
A spiritual person," she repeated, "a spiritual seeker—the word to
best describe her beliefs is pantheism. Her God was nature, and her
worship of nature extended to her love for our little herd of cows,
for all cows, really, for that most benevolent of creatures who is the
foster mother of the human race. Faunia had an enormous respect
for the institution of the family dairy farm. Along with Peg and me
and the children, she helped to try to keep the family dairy farm
alive in New England as a viable part of our cultural heritage. Her
God was everything you see around you at our farm and everything
you see around you on Battle Mountain. We chose this resting place
for Faunia because it has been sacred ever since the aboriginal peo-
ples bid farewell to their loved ones here. The wonderful stories that
Faunia told our kids—about the swallows in the barn and the
crows in the fields, about the red-tailed hawks that glide in the sky
high above our fields—they were the same kind of stories you
might have heard on this very mountaintop before the ecological
balance of the Berkshires was first disturbed by the coming of..."

The coming of you-know-who. The environmentalist Rousseau-

ism of the rest of the eulogy made it just about impossible for me to
stay focused.

The second eulogist was Smoky Hollenbeck, the former Athena

athletic star who was supervisor of the physical plant, Faunia's boss,
and—as I knew from Coleman, who'd hired him—was for a time a
bit more. It was into Smoky's Athena harem that Faunia had been
conscripted practically from her first day on his custodial staff, and
it was from his harem that she had been abruptly dismissed once
Les Farley had somehow ferreted out what Smoky was up to with
her.

Smoky didn't speak, like Sally, of Faunia's pantheistic purity as

a natural being; in his capacity as representative of the college,
he concentrated on her competence as a housekeeper, beginning

THE  PURIFYING  RITUAL

with her influence on the undergraduates whose dormitories she
cleaned.

"What changed about the students with Faunia being there,"

Smoky said, "was that they had a person who, whenever they saw
her, greeted them with a smile and a hello and a How are you, and
Did you get over your cold, and How are classes going. She would
always spend a moment talking and becoming familiar with the
students before she began her work. Over time, she was no longer
invisible to the student, no longer just a housekeeper, but another
person whom they'd developed respect for. They were always more
cognizant, as a result of knowing Faunia, of not leaving a mess be-
hind for her to have to pick up. In contrast to that, you may have
another housekeeper who never makes eye contact, really keeps a
distance from the students, really doesn't care about what the stu-
dents are doing or want to know what they're doing. Well, that was
not Faunia—never. The condition of the student dormitories, I
find, is directly related to the relationship of the students and their
housekeeper. The number of broken windows that we have to fix,
the number of holes in the walls that we have to repair, that are
made when students kick 'em, punch 'em, take their frustration
out on them . . . whatever the case may be. Graffiti on walls. The
full gamut. Well, if it was Faunia's building, you had none of this.
You had instead a building that was conducive to good productiv-
ity, to learning and living and to feeling a part of the Athena com-
munity ..."

Extremely brilliant performance by this tall, curly-haired, hand-

some young family man who had been Coleman's predecessor as
Faunia's lover. Sensual contact with Smoky's perfect custodial
worker was no more imaginable, from what he was telling us, than
with Sally's storytelling pantheist. "In the mornings," Smoky said,
"she took care of North Hall and the administrative offices there.
Though her routine changed slightly from day to day, there were
some basic things to be done every single morning, and she did
them excellently. Wastepaper baskets were emptied, the rest rooms,
of which there are three in that building, were tidied up and

cleaned. Damp mopping occurred wherever it was necessary. Vac-
uuming in high-traffic areas every day, in not-so-high-traffic areas
once a week. Dusting usually on a weekly basis. The windows in the
front and back door sash were cleaned by Faunia almost on a daily
basis, depending on the traffic. Faunia was always very proficient,
and she paid a lot of attention to details. There are certain times
you can run a vacuum cleaner and there's other times you can't—
and there was never once, not once, a complaint on that score
about Faunia Farley. Very quickly she figured out the best time for
each task to be done with the minimum inconvenience to the work
force."

Of the fourteen people, aside from the children, that I counted

around the grave, the college contingent appeared to consist only of
Smoky and a cluster of Faunia's coworkers, four men from mainte-
nance who were dressed in coats and ties and who stood silently lis-
tening to the praise for her work. From what I could make out, the
remaining mourners were either friends of Peg and Sally or local
people who bought their milk up at the farm and who'd come to
know Faunia through visiting there. Cyril Foster, our postmaster
and chief of the volunteer fire department, was the only local per-
son I recognized. Cyril knew Faunia from the little village post
office where she came twice a week to clean up and where Coleman
first saw her.

And there was Faunia's father, a large, elderly man whose pres-

ence had been acknowledged by Sally in her eulogy. He was seated
in a wheelchair only feet from the coffin, attended by a youngish
woman, a Filipino nurse or companion, who stood directly behind
him and whose face remained expressionless throughout the ser-
vice, though he could be seen lowering his forehead into his hands
and intermittently succumbing to tears.

There was no one there whom I could identify as the person re-

sponsible for the on-line eulogy for Faunia that I'd found the eve-
ning before, posted on the Athena fac.discuss news group. The
posting was headed:

THE   PURIFYING   RITUAL

From: clytemnestra@houseofatreus.com
To: fac.discuss
Subject: death of a faunia
Date: Thur 12 Nov 1998

I'd come upon it accidentally when, out of curiosity, I was check-

ing the fac.discuss calendar to see if Dean Silk's funeral might show
up under coming events. Why this scurrilous posting? Intended as
a gag, as a lark? Did it signify no more (or less) than the perverse in-
dulgence of a sadistic whim, or was it a calculated act of treachery?
Could it have been posted by Delphine Roux? Another of her un-
ascribable indictments? I didn't think so. There was nothing to be
gained by her going any further with her ingenuity than the break-
in story, and much to be lost if "clytemnestra@houseofatreus.com"
were somehow discovered to be her brainchild. Besides, from the
evidence at hand, there was nothing so crafty or contrived about a
typical Delphinian intrigue—hers smacked of hasty improvisation,
of hysterical pettiness, of the overexcited unthinking of the ama-
teur that produces the kind of wacky act that seems improbable af-
terward even to its perpetrator: the counterattack that lacks both
provocation and the refined calculation of the acidic master, how-
ever nasty its consequences may be.

No, this was mischief, more than likely, prompted by Delphine's

mischief, but more artful, more confident, more professionally de-
monic by far—a major upgrade of the venom. And what would it
now inspire? Where would this public stoning stop? Where would
the gullibility stop? How can these people be repeating to one an-
other this story told to Security by Delphine Roux—so transpar-
ently phony, so obviously a lie, how can any of them believe this
thing? And how can any connection to Coleman be proved? It can't
be. But they believe it anyway. Screwy as it is—that he broke in
there, that he broke open the files, that he broke into her computer,
e-mailed her colleagues—they believe it, they want to believe it,
they can't wait to repeat it. A story that makes no sense, that is im-

plausible, and yet nobody—certainly not publicly—raises the sim-
plest questions. Why would the man tear apart her office and call
attention to the fact that he'd broken in if he wanted to perpetrate a
hoax? Why would he compose that particular ad when ninety per-
cent of the people who saw it couldn't possibly think of it as hav-
ing anything to do with him? Who, other than Delphine Roux,
would read that ad and think of him? To do what she claimed
he'd done, he would have had to be crazy. But where is the evidence
that he was crazy? Where is the history of crazy behavior? Cole-
man Silk, who single-handedly turned this college around—that
man is crazy? Embittered, angry, isolated, yes—but crazy? People in
Athena know perfectly well that this is not the case and yet, as in the
spooks incident, they willingly act as if they don't. Simply to make
the accusation is to prove it. To hear the allegation is to believe it.
No motive for the perpetrator is necessary, no logic or rationale is
required. Only a label is required. The label is the motive. The label
is the evidence. The label is the logic. Why did Coleman Silk do
this? Because he is an x, because he is a y, because he is both. First a
racist and now a misogynist. It is too late in the century to call him
a Communist, though that is the way it used to be done. A mis-
ogynistic act committed by a man who already proved himself ca-
pable of a vicious racist comment at the expense of a vulnerable
student. That explains everything. That and the craziness.

The Devil of the Little Place—the gossip, the jealousy, the acri-

mony, the boredom, the lies. No, the provincial poisons do not
help. People are bored here, they are envious, their life is as it is and
as it will be, and so, without seriously questioning the story, they re-
peat it—on the phone, in the street, in the cafeteria, in the class-
room. They repeat it at home to their husbands and wives. It isn't
just that because of the accident there isn't time to prove it's a ridic-
ulous lie—if it weren't for the accident, she wouldn't have been able
to tell the lie in the first place. But his death is her good fortune. His
death is her salvation. Death intervenes to simplify everything. Ev-
ery doubt, every misgiving, every uncertainty is swept aside by the
greatest belittler of them all, which is death.

THE   PURIFYING  RITUAL

Walking alone to my car after Faunia's funeral, I still had no way

of knowing who at the college might have had the turn of mind to
conjure up the clytemnestra posting—the most diabolical of art
forms, the on-line art form, because of its anonymity—nor could I
have any idea of what somebody, anybody, might next come up
with to disseminate anonymously. All I knew for sure was that the
germs of malice were unleashed, and where Coleman's conduct was
concerned, there was no absurdity out of which someone wasn't
going to try to make indignant sense. An epidemic had broken out
in Athena—that's how my thinking went in the immediate after-
math of his death—and what was to contain the epidemic's spread-
ing? It was there. The pathogens were out there. In the ether. In the
universal hard drive, everlasting and undeletable, the sign of the vi-
ciousness of the human creature.

Everybody was writing Spooks now—everybody, as yet, ex-

cept me.

I am going to ask you to think [the fac.discuss posting
began] about things that are not pleasant to think about.
Not just about the violent death of an innocent woman
of thirty-four, which is awful enough, but of the circum-
stances particular to the horror and of the man who, al-
most artistically, contrived those circumstances to com-
plete his cycle of revenge against Athena College and his
former colleagues.

Some of you may know that in the hours before Cole-

man Silk staged this murder-suicide—for that is what this
man enacted on the highway by driving off the road and
through the guardrail and into the river that night—he had
forcefully broken into a faculty office in Barton Hall, ran-
sacked the papers, and sent out as e-mail a communication
written purportedly by a faculty member and designed to
jeopardize her position. The harm he did to her and to the
college was negligible. But informing that childishly spite-
ful act of burglary and forgery was the same resolve, the
same animus, which later in the evening—having been

monstrously intensified—inspired him simultaneously to
kill himself while murdering in cold blood a college custo-
dial worker whom he had cynically enticed, some months
earlier, to service him sexually.

Imagine, if you will, the plight of this woman, a run-

away at the age of fourteen, whose education had ended
in the second year of high school and who, for the rest
of her brief life, was functionally illiterate. Imagine her
contending with the wiles of a retired university profes-
sor who, in his sixteen years as the most autocratic of fac-
ulty deans, wielded more power at Athena than the presi-
dent of the college. What chance did she have to resist his
superior force? And having yielded to him, having found
herself enslaved by a perverse manly strength far exceed-
ing her own, what chance could she possibly have had to
fathom the vengeful purposes for which her hard-worked
body was to be utilized by him, first in life and then in
death?

Of all the ruthless men by whom she was successively

tyrannized, of all the violent, reckless, ruthless, insatiable
men who had tormented, battered, and broken her, there
was none whose purpose could have been so twisted by the
enmity of the unforgiving as the man who had a score to
settle with Athena College and so took one of the college's
own upon whom to wreak his vengeance, and in the most
palpable manner he could devise. On her flesh. On her
limbs. On her genitals. On her womb. The violating abor-
tion into which she was forced by him earlier this year—
and which precipitated her attempt at suicide—is only one
of who knows how many assaults perpetrated upon the
ravaged terrain of her physical being. We know by now of
the awful tableau at the murder scene, of the pornographic
posture in which he had arranged for Faunia to meet her
death, the better to register, in a single, indelible image,
her bondage, her subservience (by extension, the bondage
and subservience of the college community) to his enraged

THE   PURIFYING   RITUAL

contempt. We know—we are beginning to know, as the
horrifying facts trickle out from the police investigation—
that not all the bruise marks on Faunia's mangled body re-
sulted from damage inflicted in the fatal accident, cataclys-
mic as that was. There were patches of discoloration dis-
covered by the coroner on her buttocks and thighs that had
nothing to do with the impact of the crash, contusions that
had been administered, some time before the accident, by
very different means: either by a blunt instrument or a hu-
man fist.

Why? A word so small, and yet large enough to drive

us insane. But then a mind as pathologically sinister as
Faunia's murderer's is not easy to probe. At the root of
the cravings that drove this man, there is an impenetrable
darkness that those who are not violent by nature or vengeful
by design—those who have made their peace with the
restraints imposed by civilization on what is raw and un-
trammeled in us all—can never know. The heart of human
darkness is inexplicable. But that their car accident was no
accident, that I do know, as sure as I know that I am united
in grief with all who mourn the death of Athena's Faunia
Farley, whose oppression began in the earliest days of her
innocence and lasted to the instant of her death. That acci-
dent was no accident: it was what Coleman Silk yearned to
do with all his might. Why? This "why" I can answer and I
will answer. So as to annihilate not only the two of them,
but, with them, all trace of his history as her ultimate tor-
mentor. It was to prevent Faunia from exposing him for
what he was that Coleman Silk took her with him to the
bottom of the river.

One is left to imagine just how heinous were the crimes

that he was determined to hide.

The next day Coleman was buried beside his wife in the orderly
garden of a cemetery across from the level green sea of the college

THE  HUMAN   STAIN

athletic fields, at the foot of the oak grove behind North Hall and its
landmark hexagonal clock tower. I couldn't sleep the night before,
and when I got up that morning, I was still so agitated over how the
accident and its meaning was being systematically distorted and
broadcast to the world that I was unable to sit quietly long enough
even to drink my coffee. How can one possibly roll back all these
lies? Even if you demonstrate something's a lie, in a place like
Athena, once it's out there, it stays. Instead of pacing restlessly
around the house until it was time to head for the cemetery, I
dressed in a tie and jacket and went down to Town Street to hang
around there—down to where I could nurse the illusion that there
was something to be done with my disgust.

And with my shock. I was not prepared to think of him as dead,

let alone to see him buried. Everything else aside, the death in a
freak accident of a strong, healthy man already into his seventies
had its own awful poignancy—there would at least have been a
higher degree of rationality had he been carried off by a heart at-
tack or cancer or a stroke. What's more, I was convinced by then—I
was convinced as soon as I heard the news—that it was impossible
for the accident to have occurred without the presence somewhere
nearby of Les Farley and his pickup truck. Of course nothing that
befalls anyone is ever too senseless to have happened, and yet with
Les Farley in the picture, with Farley as primary cause, wasn't there
more than just the wisp of an explanation for the violent extinc-
tion, in a single convenient catastrophe, of Farley's despised ex-wife
and the enraging lover whom Farley had obsessively staked out?

To me, reaching this conclusion didn't seem at all motivated by a

disinclination to accept the inexplicable for what it is—though it
seemed precisely that to the state police the morning after Cole-
man's funeral, when I went to talk to the two officers who'd been
first at the scene of the accident and who'd found the bodies. Their
examination of the crash vehicle revealed nothing that could cor-
roborate in any way the scenario I was imagining. The information
I gave them—about Farley's stalking of Faunia, about his spying on
Coleman, about the near-violent confrontation, just beyond the

THE  PURIFYING  RITUAL

kitchen door, when Farley came roaring at the two of them out of
the dark—was all patiently taken down, as were my name, address,
and telephone number. I was then thanked for my cooperation,
assured that everything would be held in strictest confidence, and
told that if it seemed warranted they would be back in touch
with me.

They never were.
On the way out, I turned and said, "Can I ask one question? Can

I ask about the disposition of the bodies in the car?"

"What do you want to know, sir?" said Officer Balich, the senior

of the two young men, a poker-faced, quietly officious fellow whose
Croatian family, I remembered, used to own the Madamaska Inn.

"What exactly did you find when you found them? Their place-

ment. Their posture. The rumor in Athena—"

"No, sir," Balich said, shaking his head, "that was not the case.

None of that's true, sir."

"You know what I'm referring to?"
"I do, sir. This was clearly a case of speeding. You can't take that

curve at that speed. Jeff Gordon couldn't have taken that curve at
that speed. For an old guy with a couple glasses of wine playing
tricks on his brain to drive round that bend like a hot-rodder—"

"I don't think Coleman Silk ever in his life drove like a hot-

rodder, Officer."

"Well...," Balich said, and put his hands up in the air, the palms

to me, suggesting that, with all due respect, neither he nor I could
possibly know that. "It was the professor who was behind the
wheel, sir."

The moment had arrived when I was expected by Officer Balich

not to insert myself foolishly as an amateur detective, not to press
my contention further, but politely to take my leave. He had called
me sir more than enough times for me to have no hallucinations
about who was running the show, and so I did leave, and, as I say,
that was the end of it.

The day Coleman was to be buried was another unseasonably

warm, crisply lit November day. With the last of the leaves having

fallen from the trees during the previous week, the hard bedrock
contour of the mountain landscape was now nakedly exposed by
the sunlight, its joints and striations etched in the fine hatched lines
of an old engraving, and as I headed to Athena for the funeral that
morning, a sense of reemergence, of renewed possibility, was inap-
propriately aroused in me by the illuminated roughness of a distant
view obscured by foliage since last spring. The no-nonsense organi-
zation of the earth's surface, to be admired and deferred to now for
the first time in months, was a reminder of the terrific abrasive
force of the glacier onslaught that had scoured these mountains on
the far edge of its booming southward slide. Passing just miles from
Coleman's house, it had spat out boulders the size of restaurant re-
frigerators the way an automatic pitching machine throws fastball
strikes, and when I passed the steep wooded slope that is known lo-
cally as "the rock garden" and saw, starkly, undappled by the sum-
mer leaves and their gliding shadows, those mammoth rocks all
tumbled sideways like a ravaged Stonehenge, crushed together and
yet hugely intact, I was once again horrified by the thought of the
moment of impact that had separated Coleman and Faunia from
their lives in time and catapulted them into the earth's past. They
were now as remote as the glaciers. As the creation of the planet. As
creation itself.

This was when I decided to go to the state police. That I didn't

get out there that day, that very morning, even before the funeral,
was in part because, while parking my car across from the green in
town, I saw in the window of Pauline's Place, eating his break-
fast, Faunia's father—saw him seated at a table with the woman
who'd been steering his wheelchair up at the mountain cemetery
the day before. I immediately went inside, took the empty table be-
side theirs, ordered, and, while pretending to read the Madamaska
Weekly Gazette that someone had left by my chair, caught all I could
of their conversation.

They were talking about a diary. Among the things of hers that

Sally and Peg had turned over to Faunia's father, there had been
Faunia's diary.

THE   PURIFYING   RITUAL

"You don't want to read it, Harry. You just don't want to."
"I have to," he said.
"You don't have to," the woman said. "Believe me you don't."
"It can't be more awful than everything else."
"You don't want to read it."
Most people inflate themselves and lie about accomplishments

they have only dreamed of achieving; Faunia had lied about failing
to reach proficiency at a skill so fundamental that, in a matter of a
year or two, it is acquired at least crudely by nearly every school-
child in the world.

And this I learned before even finishing my juice. The illiteracy

had been an act, something she decided her situation demanded.
But why? A source of power? Her one and only source of power?
But a power purchased at what price? Think about it. Afflicts her-
self with illiteracy too. Takes it on voluntarily. Not to infantilize
herself, however, not to present herself as a dependent kid, but just
the opposite: to spotlight the barbaric self befitting the world. Not
rejecting learning as a stifling form of propriety but trumping
learning by a knowledge that is stronger and prior. She has nothing
against reading per se—it's that pretending not to be able to feels
right to her. It spices things up. She just cannot get enough of the
toxins: of all that you're not supposed to be, to show, to say, to think
but that you are and show and say and think whether you like it
or not.

"I can't burn it," Faunia's father said. "It's hers. I can't just throw

it in the trash."

"Well, I can," the woman said.
"It's not right."
"You have been walking through this mine field all your life. You

don't need more."

"It's all that's left of her."
"There's the revolver. That's left of her. There's the bullets, Harry.

She left that."

"The way she lived," he said, sounding suddenly at the edge of

tears.

"The way she lived is the way she died. It's why she died."
"You've got to give me the diary," he said.
"No. It's bad enough we even came here."
"Destroy it, destroy it, and I just don't know what."
"I'm only doing what is best for you."
"What does she say?"
"It doesn't bear repeating."
"Oh, God," he said.
"Eat. You have to eat something. Those pancakes look good."
"My daughter," he said.
"You did all you could."
"I should have taken her away when she was six years old."
"You didn't know. How could you know what was going to be?"
"I should never have left her with that woman."
"And we should never have come up here," his companion said.

"All you have to do now is get sick up here. Then the thing will be
complete."

"I want the ashes."
"They should have buried the ashes. In there. With her. I don't

know why they didn't."

"I want the ashes, Syl. Those are my grandkids. That's all I've got

left to show for everything."

"I've taken care of the ashes."
"No!"
"You didn't need those ashes. You've been through enough. I will

not have something happening to you. Those ashes are not coming
on the plane."

"What did you do?"
"I took care of them," she said. "I was respectful. But they're

gone."

"Oh, my God."
"That's over," she told him. "It's all over. You did your duty. You

did more than your duty. You don't need any more. Now let's you
eat something. I packed the room up. I paid. Now there's just get-
ting you home."

"Oh, you are the best, Sylvia, the very best."
"I don't want you hurt anymore. I will not let them hurt you."
"You are the best."
"Try and eat. Those look real good."
"Want some?"
"No," she said, "I want you to eat."
"I can't eat it all."
"Use the syrup. Here, I'll do it, I'll pour it."
I waited for them outside, on the green, and then when I saw the

wheelchair coming through the restaurant door, I crossed the street
and, as she was wheeling him away from Pauline's Place, I intro-
duced myself, walking alongside him as I spoke. "I live here. I knew
your daughter. Only slightly, but I met her several times. I was at the
funeral yesterday. I saw you there. I want to express my condo-
lences."

He was a large man with a large frame, much larger than he'd

seemed slumped over in the chair at the funeral. He was probably
well over six feet, but with the look on his stern, strongly boned face
(Faunia's inexpressive face, hers exactly—the thin lips, the steep
chin, the sharp aquiline nose, the same blue, deep-set eyes, and
above them, framing the pale lashes, that same puff of flesh, that
same fullness that had struck me out at the dairy farm as her one
exotic marking, her face's only emblem of allure)—with the look of
a man sentenced not just to imprisonment in that chair but con-
demned to some even greater anguish for the rest of his days. Big as
he was, or once had been, there was nothing left of him but his fear.
I saw that fear at the back of his gaze the instant he looked up to
thank me. "You're very kind," he said.

leged New England childhood in his speech that dated back to long
before either of us was born. I'd recognized it earlier in the restau-
rant—tethered, by that speech alone, by the patterns of moneyed,
quasi-Anglined speech, to the decorous conventions of an entirely
other America.

"Are you Faunia's stepmother?" That seemed as good a way as

THE   HUMAN   STAIN

any to get her attention—and to get her perhaps to slow down. I as-
sumed they were on their way back to the College Arms, around the
corner from the green.

"This is Sylvia," he said.
"I wonder if you could stop," I said to Sylvia, "so I could talk to

him."

"We're catching a plane," she told me.
Since she was so clearly determined to rid him of me then

and there, I said—while still keeping pace with the wheelchair—
"Coleman Silk was my friend. He did not drive his car off the road.
He couldn't have. Not like that. His car was forced off the road. I
know who is responsible for the death of your daughter. It wasn't
Coleman Silk."

"Stop pushing me. Sylvia, stop pushing a minute."
"No," she said. "This is insane. This is enough."
"It was her ex-husband," I said to him. "It was Farley."
"No," he said weakly, as though I'd shot him. "No—no."
"Sir!" She had stopped, all right, but the hand that wasn't holding

tight to the wheelchair had reached up to take me by the lapel. She
was short and slight, a young Filipino woman with a small, impla-
cable, pale brown face, and I could see from the dark determination
of her fearless eyes that the disorder of human affairs was not al-
lowed to intrude anywhere near what was hers to protect.

"Can't you stop for one moment?" I asked her. "Can't we go over

to the green and sit there and talk?"

"The man is not well. You are taxing the strength of a man who is

seriously ill."

"But you have a diary belonging to Faunia."
"We do not."
"You have a revolver belonging to Faunia."
"Sir, go away. Sir, leave him alone, I am warning you!" And here

she pushed at me—with the hand that had been holding my jacket,
she shoved me away.

"She got that gun," I said, "to protect herself against Farley."
Sharply, she replied, "The poor thing."

• 300 •

THE  PURIFYING   RITUAL

I didn't know what to do then except to follow them around the

corner until they reached the porch of the inn. Faunia's father was
weeping openly now.

When she turned to find me still there, she said, "You have done

enough damage. Go or I will call the police." There was great feroc-
ity in this tiny person. I understood it: keeping him alive appeared
to require no less.

"Don't destroy that diary," I said to her. "There is a record

there—"

"Filth! There is a record there of filth!"
"Syl, Sylvia—"
"All of them, her, the brother, the mother, the stepfather—the

whole bunch of them, trampling on this man his whole life. They
have robbed him. They have deceived him. They have humiliated
him. His daughter was a criminal. Got pregnant and had a child at
sixteen—a child she abandoned to an orphan asylum. A child her
father would have raised. She was a common whore. Guns and men
and drugs and filth and sex. The money he gave her—what did she
do with that money?"

"I don't know. I don't know anything about an orphan asylum.

I don't know anything about any money."

"Drugs! She stole it for drugs!"
"I don't know anything about that."
"That whole family—filth! Have some pity, please!"
I turned to him. "I want the person responsible for these deaths

to be held legally accountable. Coleman Silk did her no harm. He
did not kill her. I ask to talk to you for only a minute."

"Let him, Sylvia—"
"No! No more letting anyone! You have let them long enough!"
People were collected now on the porch of the inn watching us,

and others were watching from the upper windows. Perhaps they
were the last of the leafers, out to catch the little left of the autumn
blaze. Perhaps they were Athena alumni. There were always a hand-
ful visiting the town, middle-aged and elderly graduates checking
to see what had disappeared and what remained, thinking the best,

THE   HUMAN   STAIN

the very best, of every last thing that had ever befallen them on
these streets in nineteen hundred and whatever. Perhaps they were
visitors in town to look at the restored colonial houses, a stretch of
them running nearly a mile down both sides of Ward Street and
considered by the Athena Historical Society to be, if not so grand as
those in Salem, as important as any in the state west of the House of
the Seven Gables. These people had not come to sleep in the care-
fully decorated period bedrooms of the College Arms so as to
awaken to a shouting match beneath their windows. In a place as
picturesque as South Ward Street and on a day as fine as this, the
eruption of such a struggle—a crippled man crying, a tiny Asian
woman shouting, a man who, from his appearance, might well
have been a college professor seemingly terrifying both of them
with what he was saying—was bound to seem both more stupen-
dous and more disgusting than it would have at a big city inter-
section.

"If I could see the diary—"
"There is no diary" she said, and there was nothing more to be

done than to watch her push him up the ramp beside the stairway
and through the main door and into the inn.

Back around at Pauline's, I ordered a cup of coffee and, on writing
paper the waitress found for me in a drawer beneath the cash regis-
ter, I wrote this letter:

I am the man who approached you near the restaurant on
Town Street in Athena on the morning after Faunia's fu-
neral. I live on a rural road outside Athena, a few miles
from the home of the late Coleman Silk, who, as I ex-
plained, was my friend. Through Coleman I met your
daughter several times. I sometimes heard him speak about
her. Their affair was passionate, but there was no cruelty in
it. He mainly played the part of lover with her, but he also
knew how to be a friend and a teacher. If she asked for care,
I can't believe it was ever withheld. Whatever of Coleman's

THE   PURIFYING  RITUAL

spirit she may have absorbed could never, never have poi-
soned her life.

I don't know how much of the malicious gossip sur-

rounding them and the crash you heard in Athena. I hope
none. There is, however, a matter of justice to be settled
which dwarfs all that stupidity. Two people have been mur-
dered. I know who murdered them. I did not witness the
murder but I know it took place. I am absolutely sure of it.
But evidence is necessary if I am to be taken seriously by
the police or by an attorney. If you possess anything that re-
veals Faunia's state of mind in recent months or even ex-
tending back to her marriage to Farley, I ask you not to de-
stroy it. I am thinking of letters you may have received from
her over the years as well as the belongings found in her
room after her death that were passed on to you by Sally
and Peg.

My telephone number and address are as follows—

That was as far as I got. I intended to wait until they were gone, to
phone the College Arms to extract from the desk clerk, with some
story or other, the man's name and address, and to send off my let-
ter by overnight mail. I'd go to Sally and Peg for the address if I
couldn't get it from the inn. But I would, in fact, do neither the one
thing nor the other. Whatever Faunia had left behind in her room
had already been discarded or destroyed by Sylvia—the same way
my letter would be destroyed when it arrived at its destination. This
tiny being whose whole purpose was to keep the past from tor-
menting him further was never going to allow inside the walls of
his home what she would not permit when she'd found herself up
against me face to face. Moreover, her course was one that I could-
n't dispute. If suffering was passed around in that family like a dis-
ease, there was nothing to do but post a sign of the kind they used
to hang in the doorways of the contagiously ill when I was a kid, a
sign that read QUARANTINE or that presented to the eyes of the

THE  HUMAN   STAIN

uninfected nothing more than a big black capital Q. Little Sylvia
was that ominous Q, and there was no way that I was going to get
past it. I tore up what I'd written and walked across town to the
funeral.

The service for Coleman had been arranged by his children, and
the four of them were there at the door to Rishanger Chapel to
greet the mourners as they filed in. The idea to bury him out of
Rishanger, the college chapel, was a family decision, the key compo-
nent of what I realized was a well-planned coup, an attempt to
undo their father's self-imposed banishment and to integrate him,
in death if not in life, back into the community where he had made
his distinguished career.

When I introduced myself, I was instantly taken aside by Lisa,

Coleman's daughter, who put her arms around me and in a tearful,
whispering voice said, "You were his friend. You were the one friend
he had left. You probably saw him last."

"We were friends for a while," I said, but explained nothing about

having seen him last several months back, on that August Saturday
morning at Tanglewood, and that by then he had deliberately let
the brief friendship lapse.

"We lost him," she said.
"I know."
"We lost him," she repeated, and then she cried without attempt-

ing to speak.

After a while I said, "I enjoyed him and I admired him. I wish I

could have known him longer."

"Why did this happen?"
"I don't know."
"Did he go mad? Was he insane?"
"Absolutely not. No."
"Then how could all this happen?"
When I didn't answer (and how could I, other than by beginning

to write this book?), her arms dropped slowly away from me, and

while we stood together for a few seconds more, I saw how strong
was her resemblance to her father—strong as Faunia's to her father.
There were the same carved puppetlike features, the same green
eyes, the same tawny skin, even a less broad-shouldered version of
Coleman's slight athletic build. The visible genetic legacy of the
mother, Iris Silk, seemed to reside solely in Lisa's prodigious tan-
gle of dark bushy hair. In photograph after photograph of Iris—
photographs I'd seen in family albums Coleman had showed me—
the facial features hardly seemed to matter, so strongly did her im-
portance as a person, if not her entire meaning, appear to be con-
centrated in that assertive, theatrical endowment of hair. With Lisa,
the hair appeared to stand more in contrast to her character than—
as with her mother—to be issuing from it.

I had the definite impression, in just our few moments together,

that the link, now broken, between Lisa and her father would not be
gone from her mind for a single day throughout the remainder of
her life. One way or another, the idea of him would be fused to ev-
ery last thing she would ever think about or do or fail to do. The
consequences of having loved him so fully as a beloved girl-child,
and of having been estranged from him at the time of his death,
would never let this woman be.

The three Silk men—Lisa's twin brother, Mark, and the two el-

dest, Jeffrey and Michael—were not so emotional in greeting me. I
saw nothing of Mark's angry intensity as an affronted son, and
when, an hour or so later, his sober demeanor gave way at the
graveside, it was with the severity of one bereft beyond redemption.
Jeff and Michael were obviously the sturdiest Silk children, and in
them you clearly saw the physical imprint of the robust mother:
if not her hair (both men were by now bald), her height, her solid
core of confidence, her open-hearted authority. These were not
people who muddled through. That was apparent in just the greet-
ing they extended and the few words they said. When you met Jeff
and Michael, especially if they were standing side by side, you'd met
your match. Back before I got to know Coleman—back in his hey-

THE   HUMAN   STAIN

day, before he began to spin out of control within the ever-narrow-
ing prison of his rage, before the achievements that once particu-
larized him, that were him, vanished from his life—you would
surely have met your match in him too, which probably explains
why a general willingness to compromise the dean was so quick to
materialize once he was accused of uttering aloud something ra-
cially vicious.

Despite all the rumors circulating in town, the turnout for Cole-

man far exceeded what I'd been imagining it would be; it certainly
exceeded what Coleman could have imagined. The first six or seven
rows of pews were already full, and people were still streaming in
behind me when I found an empty place midway up from the altar
beside someone whom I recognized—from having seen him for the
first time the day before—to be Smoky Hollenbeck. Did Smoky un-
derstand how close he might have come, only a year earlier, to hav-
ing a funeral service of his own held here in Rishanger Chapel?
Maybe he was attending the service more in gratitude for his own
good luck than out of regard for the man who'd been his erotic suc-
cessor.

On Smoky's other side was a woman I took to be his wife, a

pretty blonde of about forty and, if I remembered correctly, an
Athena classmate Smoky had married back in the seventies and the
mother now of their five children. The Hollenbecks were among
the youngest people, aside from Coleman's family, whom I saw in
the chapel when I began to look around me. Largely there were
Athena elders, college faculty and staff whom Coleman had known
for close to forty years before Iris's death and his resignation. What
would he think about these old-timers showing up at Rishanger to
see him off could he observe them seated before his coffin? Proba-
bly something like, "What a wonderful occasion for self-approval.
How virtuous they all must feel for not holding against me my con-
tempt for them."

It was strange to think, while seated there with all his colleagues,

that people so well educated and professionally civil should have

fallen so willingly for the venerable human dream of a situation in
which one man can embody evil. Yet there is this need, and it is un-
dying and it is profound.

When the outside door was pulled shut and the Silks took their

seats in the front row, I saw that the chapel was almost two-thirds
full, three hundred people, maybe more, waiting for this ancient
and natural human event to absorb their terror about the end of
life. I saw, too, that Mark Silk, alone among his brothers, was wear-
ing a skullcap.

Probably like most everyone else, I was expecting one of Cole-

man's children to mount the pulpit and speak first. But there was to
be only one speaker that morning, and that was Herb Keble, the po-
litical scientist hired by Dean Silk as Athena's first black professor.
Obviously Keble had been chosen by the family for the reason the
family had chosen Rishanger for the service: to rehabilitate their fa-
ther's name, to push back the Athena calendar and restore to Cole-
man his former status and prestige. When I recalled the severity
with which Jeff and Michael had each taken my hand and acknowl-
edged me by name and told me, "Thank you for coming—it means
everything to the family that you're here," and when I imagined that
they must have repeated something like that to each individual
mourner, among whom there were many people they had known
since childhood, I thought, And they don't intend to quit, not until
the administration building is rededicated as Coleman Silk Hall.

That the place was nearly full was probably no chance occur-

rence. They must have been on the phone ever since the crash,
mourners being rounded up the way voters used to be herded to
the polls when the old Mayor Daley was running Chicago. And how
they must have worked over Keble, whom Coleman had especially
despised, to induce him voluntarily to proffer himself as the scape-
goat for Athena's sins. The more I thought about these Silk boys
twisting Keble's arm, intimidating him, shouting at him, denounc-
ing him, perhaps even outright threatening him because of the
way he had betrayed their father two years back, the more I liked

THE  HUMAN  STAIN

them—and the more I liked Coleman for having sired two big,
firm, smart fellows who were not reluctant to do what had to be
done to turn his reputation right side out. These two were going to
help put Les Farley away for the rest of his life.

Or so I was able to believe until the next afternoon, just before

they left town, when—no less bluntly persuasive with me than I'd
imagined them to have been with Keble—they let me know that I
was to knock it off: to forget about Les Farley and the circum-
stances of the accident and about urging any further investigation
by the police. They could not have made clearer that their disap-
proval would be boundless if their father's affair with Faunia Farley
were to become the focal point of a courtroom trial instigated by
my importuning. Faunia Farley's was a name they never wanted to
hear again, least of all in a scandalous trial that would be written up
sensationally in the local papers and lodged indelibly in local mem-
ory and that would leave Coleman Silk Hall forever a dream.

"She is not the ideal woman to have linked with our father's leg-

acy," Jeffrey told me. "Our mother is," said Michael. "This cheap lit-
tle cunt has nothing to do with anything." "Nothing," Jeffrey reiter-
ated. It was hard to believe, given the ardor and the resolve, that out
in California they were college science professors. You would have
thought they ran Twentieth Century Fox.

Herb Keble was a slender, very dark man, elderly now, a bit stiff-
gaited, though seemingly in no way stooped or hobbled by illness,
and with something of the earnestness of the black preacher in
both the stern bearing and the ominous, hanging-judge voice. He
had only to say "My name is Herbert Keble" to cast his spell; he had
only, from behind the podium, to stare silently at Coleman's coffin
and then to turn to the congregation and announce who he was to
invoke that realm of feeling associated with the declamation of the
holy psalms. He was austere in the way the edge of a blade is aus-
tere—menacing to you if you don't handle it with the utmost care.
Altogether the man was impressive, in demeanor and appearance
both, and one could see where Coleman might have hired him to

break the color barrier at Athena for something like the same rea-
sons that Branch Rickey had hired Jackie Robinson to be organized
baseball's first black. Imagining the Silk boys browbeating Herb
Keble into doing their bidding wasn't that easy, at first, not until
you took into account the appeal of self-drama to a personality
marked so clearly by the vanity of those authorized to administer
the sacraments. He very much displayed the authority of the sec-
ond in power to the sovereign.

"My name is Herbert Keble," he began. "I am chairman of the

Political Science Department. In 1996, I was among those who did
not see fit to rise to Coleman's defense when he was accused of rac-
ism—I, who had come to Athena sixteen years earlier, the very year
that Coleman Silk was appointed dean of faculty; I, who was Dean
Silk's first academic appointment. Much too tardily, I stand before
you to censure myself for having failed my friend and patron, and
to do what I can—again, much too tardily—to begin to attempt to
right the wrong, the grievous, the contemptible wrong, that was
done to him by Athena College.

"At the time of the alleged racist incident, I told Coleman, 'I can't

be with you on this.' I said it to him deliberately, though perhaps
not entirely for the opportunistic, careerist, or cowardly reasons
that he was so quick to assume to be mine. I thought then that I
could do more for Coleman's cause by working behind the scenes
to defuse the opposition than by openly allying myself with him in
public, and being rendered impotent, as I surely would have been,
by that all-purpose, know-nothing weapon of a sobriquet, 'Uncle
Tom.' I thought that I could be the voice of reason from within—
rather than without—the ranks of those whose outrage over Cole-
man's alleged racist remark provoked them into unfairly defaming
him and the college for what were the failures of two students. I
thought that if I was shrewd enough and patient enough I could
cool the passions, if not of the most extreme of his adversaries, then
of those thoughtful, level-headed members of our local African
American community and their white sympathizers, whose antago-
nism was never really more than reflexive and ephemeral. I thought

that, in time—and, I hoped, in less time rather than more—I could
initiate a dialogue between Coleman and his accusers that would
lead to the promulgation of a statement identifying the nature
of the misunderstanding that had given rise to the conflict, and
thereby bring this regrettable incident to something like a just con-
clusion.

"I was wrong. I should never have said to my friend, 'I can't be

with you on this.' I should have said, 'I must be with you.' I should
have worked to oppose his enemies not insidiously and misguid-
edly from within but forthrightly and honestly from without—
from where he could have taken heart at the expression of support
instead of being left to nurse the crushing sense of abandonment
that festered into the wound that led to his alienation from his col-
leagues, to his resignation from the college, and from there to the
self-destructive isolation which, I am convinced—horrible as be-
lieving this is for me—led not too circuitously to his dying as tragi-
cally, wastefully, and unnecessarily as he did in that car the other
night. I should have spoken up to say what I want to say now in the
presence of his former colleagues, associates, and staff, and to say,
especially, in the presence of his children, Jeff and Mike, who are
here from California, and Mark and Lisa, who are here from New
York—and to say, as the senior African American member of the
Athena faculty:

"Coleman Silk never once deviated in any way from totally fair

conduct in his dealings with each and every one of his students for
as long as he served Athena College. Never.

"The alleged misconduct never took place. Never.
"What he was forced to undergo—the accusations, the inter-

views, the inquiry—remains a blight on the integrity of this institu-
tion to this day, and on this day, more than ever. Here, in the New
England most identified, historically, with the American individu-
alist's resistance to the coercions of a censorious community—
Hawthorne, Melville, and Thoreau come to mind—an American
individualist who did not think that the weightiest thing in life

were the rules, an American individualist who refused to leave un-
examined the orthodoxies of the customary and of the established
truth, an American individualist who did not always live in compli-
ance with majority standards of decorum and taste—an American
individualist par excellence was once again so savagely traduced by
friends and neighbors that he lived estranged from them until his
death, robbed of his moral authority by their moral stupidity. Yes, it
is we, the morally stupid censorious community, who have abased
ourselves in having so shamefully besmirched Coleman Silk's good
name. I speak particularly of those like myself, who knew from
close contact the depth of his commitment to Athena and the pu-
rity of his dedication as an educator, and who, out of whatever de-
luded motive, betrayed him nonetheless. I say it again: we betrayed
him. Betrayed Coleman and betrayed Iris. "Iris's death, the death
of Iris Silk, coming in the midst of..." Two seats to my left, Smoky
Hollenbeck's wife was in tears, as were several other of the women
nearby. Smoky was himself leaning forward, his forehead resting
lightly on his two hands, which were entwined at the top of the
pew in front of us in a vaguely ecclesiastical manner. I suppose he
wanted me or his wife or whoever else might be watching him to
believe that the injustice done to Coleman Silk was unendurable
to think about. I supposed he was meant to appear to be overcome
by compassion, yet knowing what I did about all that he concealed,
as a model family man, of the Dio-nysian substrata of his life, it was
an inference hard to swallow.

But, Smoky aside, the attention, the concentration, the acuity of

the concentration focused on Herb Keble's every word seemed gen-
uine enough for me to imagine that any number of people present
would be finding it difficult not to lament what Coleman Silk had
unfairly endured. I wondered, of course, if Keble's rationalization
for why he hadn't stood beside Coleman at the time of the spooks
incident was of his own devising or one that the Silk boys had come
up with so as to enable him to do as they demanded while still sav-
ing face. I wondered whether the rationalization could be an accu-

rate description of his motives when he'd said the words that Cole-
man bitterly repeated to me so many times: "I can't be with you
on this."

Why was I unwilling to believe this man? Because, by a certain

age, one's mistrust is so exquisitely refined that one is unwilling to
believe anybody? Surely, two years back, when he was silent and
didn't rise to Coleman's defense, it was for the reason that people
are always silent: because it is in their interest to be silent. Expedi-
ency is not a motive that is steeped in darkness. Herb Keble was just
another one out trying to kosher the record, albeit in a bold, even
an interesting way, by taking the guilt upon himself, but the fact re-
mained that he couldn't act when it mattered, and so I thought, on
Coleman's behalf, Fuck him.

When Keble came down from the podium and, before returning

to his seat, stopped to shake the hands of each of Coleman's chil-
dren, that simple gesture served only to intensify the almost violent
passion aroused by his speech. What would happen next? For a mo-
ment there was nothing. Just the silence and the coffin and the
emotional intoxication of the crowd. Then Lisa stood up, mounted
the few steps to the podium, and, from the lectern, said, "The last
movement of Mahler's Third Symphony." That was it. They pulled
out all the stops. They played Mahler.

Well, you can't listen to Mahler sometimes. When he picks you

up to shake you, he doesn't stop. By the end of it, we were all crying.

Speaking only for myself, I don't think anything could have torn

me apart like that other than hearing Steena Palsson's rendition of
"The Man I Love" as she'd sung it from the foot of Coleman's
Sullivan Street bed in 1948.

The three-block walk to the cemetery was memorable largely for its
seemingly not having taken place. One moment we were immobi-
lized by the infinite vulnerability of Mahler's adagio movement, by
that simplicity that is not artifice, that is not a strategy, that unfolds,
it almost seems, with the accumulated pace of life and with all of

life's unwillingness to end... one moment we were immobilized by
that exquisite juxtaposition of grandeur and intimacy that begins
in the quiet, singing, restrained intensity of the strings and then
rises in surges through the massive false ending that leads to the
true, the extended, the monumental ending . . . one moment we
were immobilized by the swelling, soaring, climaxing, and subsid-
ing of an elegiac orgy that rolls on and on and on with a deter-
mined pace that never changes, giving way, then coming back like
pain or longing that won't disappear . . . one moment we were, at
Mahler's mounting insistence, inside the coffin with Coleman, at-
tuned to all the terror of endlessness and to the passionate desire to
escape death, and then somehow or other sixty or seventy of us had
got ourselves over to the cemetery to watch as he was buried, a sim-
ple enough ritual, as sensible a solution to the problem as any ever
devised but one that is never entirely comprehensible. You have to
see it to believe it each time.

I doubted that most people had been planning to accompany the

body all the way to the grave. But the Silk children had a flair for
drawing out and sustaining pathos, and this, I assumed, was why
there were so many of us crowding around as close as we could to
the hole that was to be Coleman's eternal home, as though eager al-
most to crawl in there and take his place, to offer ourselves up as
surrogates, as substitutes, as sacrificial offerings, if that would mag-
ically allow for the resumption of the exemplary life that, by Herb
Keble's own admission, had been as good as stolen from Coleman
two years back.

Coleman was to be buried beside Iris. The dates on her head-

stone read 1932-1996. His would read 1926-1998. How direct those
numbers are. And how little they connote of what went on.

I heard the Kaddish begin before I realized that somebody there

was chanting it. Momentarily I imagined that it must be drifting in
from another part of the cemetery, when it was coming from the
other side of the grave, where Mark Silk—the youngest son, the an-
gry son, the son who, like his twin sister, bore the strongest resem-

THE   HUMAN   STAIN

blance to his father—was standing alone, with the book in his hand
and the yarmulke on his head, and chanting in a soft, tear-filled
voice the familiar Hebrew prayer.

Yisgadal, v'yiskadash...
Most people in America, including myself and probably Mark's

siblings, don't know what these words mean, but nearly everyone
recognizes the sobering message they bring: a Jew is dead. Another
Jew is dead. As though death were not a consequence of life but a
consequence of having been a Jew.

When Mark had finished, he shut the book and then, having in-

duced a grim serenity in everyone else, was himself overcome by
hysteria. That was how Coleman's funeral ended—with all of us
immobilized this time by watching Mark go to pieces, helplessly
flailing his arms in the air and, through a wide-open mouth, wail-
ing away. That wild sound of lamentation, older even than the
prayer he'd uttered, rose in intensity until, when he saw his sis-
ter rushing toward him with arms outstretched, he turned to her
his contorted Silk face, and in sheer childlike astonishment cried,
"We're never going to see him again!"

I did not think my most generous thought. Generous thoughts

were hard to come by that day. I thought, What difference should
that make? You weren't that keen on seeing him when he was here.

Mark Silk apparently had imagined that he was going to have his

father around to hate forever. To hate and hate and hate and hate,
and then perhaps, in his own good time, after the scenes of accusa-
tion had reached their crescendo and he had flogged Coleman to
within an inch of his life with his knot of filial grievance, to forgive.
He thought Coleman was going to stay here till the whole play
could be performed, as though he and Coleman had been set down
not in life but on the southern hillside of the Athenian acropolis, in
an outdoor theater sacred to Dionysus, where, before the eyes of ten
thousand spectators, the dramatic unities were once rigorously ob-
served and the great cathartic cycle was enacted annually. The hu-
man desire for a beginning, a middle, and an end—and an end ap-
propriate in magnitude to that beginning and middle—is realized

nowhere so thoroughly as in the plays that Coleman taught at
Athena College. But outside the classical tragedy of the fifth century

B.C., the expectation of completion, let alone of a just and perfect
consummation, is a foolish illusion for an adult to hold.

People began to drift away. I saw the Hollenbecks move along the

path between the gravestones and head toward the nearby street,
the husband's arm around his wife's shoulder, shepherding her pro-
tectively away. I saw the young lawyer, Nelson Primus, who had rep-
resented Coleman during the spooks incident, and with him a
pregnant young woman, a woman weeping, who must have been
his wife. I saw Mark with his sister, still having to be consoled by
her, and I saw Jeff and Michael, who had run this whole operation
so expertly, talking quietly to Herb Keble a few yards from where I
was standing. I couldn't myself go because of Les Farley. Away from
this cemetery he muscled on undisturbed, uncharged with any
crime, manufacturing that crude reality all his own, a brute of a be-
ing colliding with whomever he liked however he liked for all the
inner reasons that justified anything he wanted to do.

Sure, I know there's no completion, no just and perfect consum-

mation, but that didn't mean that, standing just feet from where the
coffin rested in its freshly dug pit, I wasn't obstinately thinking that
this ending, even if it were construed as having permanently rees-
tablished Coleman's place as an admired figure in the college's his-
tory, would not suffice. Too much truth was still concealed.

I meant by this the truth about his death and not the truth that

was to come to light a moment or two later. There is truth and then
again there is truth. For all that the world is full of people who go
around believing they've got you or your neighbor figured out,
there really is no bottom to what is not known. The truth about us
is endless. As are the lies. Caught between, I thought. Denounced
by the high-minded, reviled by the righteous—then exterminated
by the criminally crazed. Excommunicated by the saved, the elect,
the ever-present evangelists of the mores of the moment, then pol-
ished off by a demon of ruthlessness. Both human exigencies found
their conjunction in him. The pure and the impure, in all their

vehemence, on the move, akin in their common need of the enemy.
Whipsawed, I thought. Whipsawed by the inimical teeth of this
world. By the antagonism that is the world.

One woman, by herself, had remained as close to the open grave

as I was. She was silent and did not look to be crying. She didn't
even appear to be quite there—that is to say, in the cemetery, at a
funeral. She could have been on a street corner, waiting patiently
for the next bus. It was the way she was holding her handbag primly
in front of her that made me think of someone who was already
prepared to pay her fare, and then to be carried off to wherever she
was going. I could tell she wasn't white only by the thrust of her jaw
and the cast of her mouth—by something suggestively protrusive
shaping the lower half of her face—and, too, by the stiff texture
of her hairdo. Her complexion was no darker than a Greek's or a
Moroccan's, and perhaps I might not have added one clue to an-
other to matter-of-factly register her as black, if it wasn't that Herb
Keble was among the very few who hadn't yet headed for home.
Because of her age—sixty-five, maybe seventy—I thought she must
be Keble's wife. No wonder, then, that she looked so strangely
transfixed. It could not have been easy to listen to her husband
publicly cast himself (under the sway of whatever motive) as
Athena's scapegoat. I could understand how she would have a lot to
think about, and how assimilating it might take more time than the
funeral had allowed. Her thoughts had still to be with what he had
said back in Rishanger Chapel. That's where she was.

I was wrong.
As I turned to leave, she happened to turn too, and so, with only

a foot or two between us, we were facing each other.

"My name's Nathan Zuckerman," I said. "I was a friend of Cole-

man's near the end of his life."

"How do you do," she replied.
"I believe your husband changed everything today."
She did not look at me as if I were mistaken, though I was. Nor

did she ignore me, decide to be rid of me, and proceed on her way.

THE  PURIFYING   RITUAL

Nor did she look as if she didn't know what to do, though that she
was in a quandary had to have been so. A friend of Coleman's at the
end of his life? Given her true identity, how could she have said
nothing more than "I'm not Mrs. Keble" and walked off?

But all she did was to stand there, opposite me, expressionless, so

profoundly struck dumb by the day's events and its revelations that
not to understand who she was to Coleman would, at that moment,
have been impossible. It wasn't a resemblance to Coleman that reg-
istered, and registered quickly, in rapid increments, as with a dis-
tant star seen through a lens that you've steadily magnified to the
correct intensity. What I saw—when, at long last, I did see, see all
the way, clear to Coleman's secret—was the facial resemblance to
Lisa, who was even more her aunt's niece than she was her father's
daughter.

It was from Ernestine—back at my house in the hours after the fu-
neral—that I learned most of what I know about Coleman's grow-
ing up in East Orange: about Dr. Fensterman trying to get Coleman
to take a dive on his final exams so as to let Bert Fensterman slip in
ahead of him as valedictorian; about how Mr. Silk found the East
Orange house in 1926, the small frame house that Ernestine still oc-
cupied and that was sold to her father "by a couple," Ernestine ex-
plained to me, "who were mad at the people next door and so were
determined to sell it to colored to spite them." ("See, you can tell the
generation I am," she said to me later that day. "I say 'colored' and
'Negro.'") She told me about how her father had lost the optician
shop during the Depression, how it took time for him to get over
the loss—"I'm not sure," she said, "he ever did"—and how he got a
job as a waiter on the dining car and worked for the railroad for the
rest of his life. She talked about how Mr. Silk called English "the
language of Chaucer, Shakespeare, and Dickens," and saw to it that
the children learned not just to speak properly but to think logi-
cally, to classify, to analyze, to describe, to enumerate, to learn not
only English but Latin and Greek; how he took them to the New

York museums and to see Broadway plays; and how, when he found
out about Coleman's secret career as an amateur boxer for the New-
ark Boys Club, he had told him, in that voice that radiated author-
ity without ever having to be raised, "If I were your father I would
say, 'You won last night? Good. Now you can retire undefeated.' "
From Ernestine I learned how Doc Chizner, my own boxing in-
structor during the year I took his after-school class down in New-
ark, had, earlier, in East Orange, laid claim to young Coleman's tal-
ent after Coleman left the Boys Club, how Doc had wanted him to
box for the University of Pittsburgh, could have gotten him a schol-
arship to Pitt as a white boxer, but how Coleman had enrolled
at Howard because that was their father's plan. How their father
dropped dead while serving dinner on the train one night, and how
Coleman had immediately quit Howard to join the navy, and to
join as a white man. How after the navy he moved to Greenwich
Village to go to NYU. How he brought that white girl home one
Sunday, the pretty girl from Minnesota. How the biscuits burned
that day, so preoccupied were they all with not saying the wrong
thing. How, luckily for everyone, Walt, who'd begun teaching down
in Asbury Park, hadn't been able to drive up for dinner, how things
just went along so wonderfully that Coleman could have had noth-
ing to complain about. Ernestine told me how gracious Coleman's
mother had been to the girl. Steena. How thoughtful and kind
they'd been to Steena—and Steena to them. How hardworking
their mother was always, how, after their father died, she had risen,
by virtue of merit alone, to become the first colored head nurse on
the surgical floor of a Newark hospital. And how she had adored
her Coleman, how there was nothing Coleman could do to destroy
his mother's love. Even the decision to spend the rest of his life pre-
tending his mother had been somebody else, a mother he'd never
had and who had never existed, even that couldn't free Mrs. Silk of
him. And after Coleman had come home to tell his mother he was
marrying Iris Gittelman and that she would never be mother-in-
law to her daughter-in-law or grandmother to her grandchildren,
when Walt forbade Coleman from ever contacting the family again,

THE  PURIFYING  RITUAL

how Walt then made it clear to their mother—and employing the
same steely authority by which his father had governed them—that
she was not to contact Coleman either.

"I know he meant the best," Ernestine said. "Walt thought this

was the only way to protect Mother from being hurt. From being
hurt by Coleman every time there was a birthday, every time there
was a holiday, every time it was Christmas. He believed that if
the line of communication remained open, Coleman was going to
break Mother's heart a thousand times over, exactly the way he did
it that day. Walt was enraged at Coleman for coming over to East
Orange without any preparation, without warning any of us, and to
tell an elderly woman, a widow like that, just what the law was go-
ing to be. Fletcher, my husband, always had a psychological rea-
son for Walt's doing what he did. But I don't think Fletcher was
right. I don't think Walt was ever truly jealous of Coleman's place in
Mother's heart. I don't accept that. I think he was insulted and
flared up—not just for Mother but for all of us. Walt was the politi-
cal member of the family; of course he was going to get mad. I my-
self wasn't mad that way and I never have been, but I can under-
stand Walter. Every year, on Coleman's birthday, I phoned Athena
to talk to him. Right down to three days ago. That was his birthday.
His seventy-second birthday. I would think that when he got killed,
he was driving home from his birthday dinner. I phoned to wish
him a happy birthday. There was no answer and so I called the next
day. And that's how I found out he was dead. Somebody there at the
house picked up the phone and told me. I realize now that it was
one of my nephews. I only began calling the house after Coleman's
wife died and he left the college and was living alone. Before that,
I phoned the office. Never told anybody about it. Didn't see any
reason to. Phoned on his birthdays. Phoned when Mother died.
Phoned when I got married. Phoned when I had my son. I phoned
him when my husband died. We always had a good talk together.
He always wanted to hear the news, even about Walter and his pro-
motions. And then each of the times that Iris gave birth, with
Jeffrey, with Michael, then with the twins, I got a call from Cole-

THE  HUMAN   STAIN

man. He'd call me at school. That was always a great trial for him.
He was testing fate with so many kids. Because they were geneti-
cally linked to the past he had repudiated, there was always the
chance, you see, that they might be a throwback in some distin-
guishing way. He worried a lot about that. It could have hap-
pened—it sometimes does happen. But he went ahead and had
them anyway. That was a part of the plan too. The plan to lead a full
and regular and productive life. Still, I believe that, in those first
years especially, and certainly whenever a new child came along,
Coleman suffered for his decision. Nothing ever escaped Coleman's
attention, and that held true for his own feelings. He could cut
himself away from us, but not from his feelings. And that was most
true where the children were concerned. I think he himself came to
believe that there was something awful about withholding some-
thing so crucial to what a person is, that it was their birthright to
know their genealogy. And there was something dangerous too.
Think of the havoc he could create in their lives if their children
were born recognizably Negro. So far he has been lucky, and that
goes for the two grandchildren out in California. But think of his
daughter, who isn't married yet. Suppose one day she has a white
husband, as more than likely she will, and she gives birth to a Ne-
groid child, as she can—as she may. How does she explain this? And
what will her husband assume? He will assume that another man
fathered her child. A black man at that. Mr. Zuckerman, it was
frighteningly cruel for Coleman not to tell his children. That is not
Walter's judgment—that is mine. If Coleman was intent on keeping
his race his secret, then the price he should have paid was not to
have children. And he knew that. He had to know that. Instead, he
has planted an unexploded bomb. And that bomb seemed to me al-
ways in the background when he talked about them. Especially
when he talked about, not the twin girl, but the twin boy, Mark, the
boy he had all the trouble with. He said to me that Markie probably
hated him for his own reasons, yet it was as though he had figured
out the truth. 'I got there what I produced,' he said, 'even if for the
wrong reason. Markie doesn't even have the luxury of hating his fa-

THE  PURIFYING   RITUAL

ther for the real thing. I robbed him,' Coleman said, 'of that part of
his birthright, too.' And I said, 'But he might not have hated you at
all for that, Coleman.' And he said, 'You don't follow me. Not that
he would have hated me for being black. That's not what I mean by
the real thing. I mean that he would have hated me for never telling
him and because he had a right to know.' And then, because there
was so much there to be misunderstood, we just let the subject
drop. But it was clear that he could never forget that there was a lie
at the foundation of his relationship to his children, a terrible lie,
and that Markie had intuited it, somehow understood that the chil-
dren, who carried their father's identity in their genes and who
would pass that identity on to their children, at least genetically,
and perhaps even physically, tangibly, never had the complete
knowledge of who they are and who they were. This is somewhat
in the nature of speculation, but I sometimes think that Cole-
man saw Markie as the punishment for what he had done to his
own mother. Though that," Ernestine added, scrupulously, "is not
something he ever said. As for Walter, what I was getting at about
Walter is that all he was trying to do was to fill our father's shoes by
making sure that Mother's heart would not be broken time and
again."

"And was it?" I asked.
"Mr. Zuckerman, there was no repairing it—ever. When she died

in the hospital, when she was delirious, do you know what she was
saying? She kept calling for the nurse the way the sick patients used
to call for her. 'Oh, nurse,' she said, 'oh, nurse—get me to the train. I
got a sick baby at home.' Over and over, 'I got a sick baby at home.'
Sitting there beside her bed, holding her hand and watching her
die, I knew who that sick baby was. So did Walter know. It was
Coleman. Whether she would have been better off had Walt not in-
terfered the way he did by banishing Coleman forever like that...
well, I still hesitate to say. But Walter's special talent as a man is his
decisiveness. That was Coleman's as well. Ours is a family of deci-
sive men. Daddy had it, and so did his father, who was a Methodist
minister down in Georgia. These men make up their minds, and

THE  HUMAN   STAIN

that's it. Well, there was a price to pay for their decisiveness. One
thing is clear, however. And I realized that today. And I wish my
parents could know it. We are a family of educators. Beginning with
my paternal grandmother. As a young slave girl, taught to read
by her mistress, then, after Emancipation, went to what was then
called Georgia State Normal and Industrial School for Colored.
That's how it began, and that's what we have turned out to be. And
that is what I realized when I saw Coleman's children. All but one of
them teachers. And all of us—Walt, Coleman, me, all of us teachers
as well. My own son is another story. He did not finish college. We
had some disagreements, and now he has a significant other, as the
expression goes, and we have our disagreement about that. I should
tell you that there were no colored teachers in the white Asbury
Park school system when Walter arrived there in '47. You have to re-
member, he was the first. And subsequently their first Negro princi-
pal. And subsequently their first Negro superintendent of schools.
That tells you something about Walt. There was already a well-es-
tablished colored community, but it was not till Walter got there in
'47 that things began to change. And that decisiveness of his had a
lot to do with it. Even though you're a Newark product, I'm not
sure you know that up until 1947, legally, constitutionally separate,
segregated education was approved in New Jersey. You had, in most
communities, schools for colored children and schools for white
children. There was a distinct separation of the races in elemen-
tary education in south Jersey. From Trenton, New Brunswick, on
down, you had separate schools. And in Princeton. And in Asbury
Park. In Asbury Park, when Walter arrived there, there was a school
called Bangs Avenue, East or West—one of them was for colored
children who lived in that Bangs Avenue neighborhood and the
other one was for white children who lived in that neighborhood.
Now that was one building, but it was divided into two parts. There
was a fence between the two sides of the building, and one side
was colored kids and on the other was white kids. Likewise, the
teachers on one side were white and the teachers on the other side
were colored. The principal was white. In Trenton, in Princeton—

and Princeton is not considered south Jersey—there were separate
schools up until 1948. Not in East Orange and not in Newark,
though at one time, even in Newark there was an elementary school
for colored children. That was the early 1900s. But in 1947—and I'm
getting to Walter's place in all this, because I want you to under-
stand my brother Walter, I want you to see his relationship to
Coleman within the wider picture of what was going on back then.
This is years before the civil rights movement. Even what Coleman
did, the decision that he made, despite his Negro ancestry, to live as
a member of another racial group—that was by no means an un-
common decision before the civil rights movement. There were
movies about it. Remember them? One was called Pinky, and there
was another, with Mel Ferrer, though I can't remember the name of
it, but it was popular too. Changing your racial group—there was
no civil rights to speak of, no equality, so that was on people's
minds, white as well as colored. Maybe more in their minds than
happening in reality, but still, it fascinated people in the way they
are fascinated by a fairy tale. But then in 1947, the governor called
for a constitutional convention to revise the constitution of the
state of New Jersey. And that was the beginning of something. One
of the constitutional revisions was that there would no longer be
separated or segregated National Guard units in New Jersey. The
second part, the second change in the new constitution, said that
no longer shall children be forced to pass one school to get to an-
other school in their neighborhood. The wording was something
like that. Walter could tell it to you verbatim. Those amendments
eliminated segregation in the public schools and in the National
Guard. The governor and the boards of education were told to im-
plement that. The state board advised all the local boards of educa-
tion to set into operation plans to integrate the schools. They sug-
gested first integrating the faculties of the schools and then slowly
integrating the schools insofar as pupils were concerned. Now, even
before Walt went to Asbury Park, even as a student at Montclair
State when he came home from the war, he was one of those who
were politically concerned—one of those ex-GIs who were already

actively fighting for integration of the schools in New Jersey. Even
before the constitutional revision, and after it was revised, certainly,
Walter remained among the most active in the fight to integrate the
schools."

Her point was that Coleman was not one of those ex-GIs fighting

for integration and equality and civil rights; in Walt's opinion, he
was never fighting for anything other than himself. Silky Silk. That's
who he fought as, who he fought for, and that's why Walt could
never stand Coleman, even when Coleman was a boy. In it for him-
self, Walt used to say. In it always for Coleman alone. All he ever
wanted was out.

We had finished lunch at my house several hours earlier, but

Ernestine's energy showed no signs of abating. Everything whirl-
ing inside her brain—and not just as a consequence of Coleman's
death but everything about the mystery of him that she had been
trying to fathom for the last fifty years—was causing her to speak in
a rush that was not necessarily characteristic of the serious small-
town schoolteacher she'd been for the whole of her life. She was a
very proper-looking woman, seemingly healthy if a bit drawn in the
face, whose appetites you couldn't have imagined to be in any way
excessive; from her dress and her posture, from the meticulous way
she ate her lunch, even from the way she occupied her chair, it was
clear that hers was a personality that had no difficulty subjugating
itself to social convention and that her inmost reflex in any conflict
would be to act automatically as the mediator—entirely the master
of the sensible response, by choice more of a listener than a maker
of speeches, and yet the aura of excitement surrounding the death
of her self-declared white brother, the special significance of the
end of a life that to her family had seemed like one long, perverse,
willfully arrogant defection, could hardly be reckoned with by ordi-
nary means.
"Mother went to her grave wondering why Coleman did it. 'Lost
himself to his own people.' That's how she put it. He wasn't the first
in Mother's family. There'd been others. But they were others. They
weren't Coleman. Coleman never in his life chafed under being a

THE  PURIFYING  RITUAL

Negro. Not for as long as we knew him. This is true. Being a Negro
was just never an issue with him. You'd see Mother sitting in her
chair at night, sitting there stock-still, and you knew what she was
wondering: could it be this, could it be that? Was it to get away from
Daddy? But by the time he did it, Daddy was dead. Mother would
propose reasons, but none was ever adequate. Was it because he
thought white people were better than us? They had more money
than we did, sure—but better? Is that what he believed? We never
saw the slightest evidence of that. Now, people grow up and go
away and have nothing to do with their families ever again, and
they don't have to be colored to act like that. It happens every day
all over the world. They hate everything so much they just disap-
pear. But Coleman as a kid was not a hater. The breeziest, most op-
timistic child you ever wanted to see. Growing up, I was more
unhappy than Coleman. Walt was more unhappy than Coleman.
What with all the success he had, with the attention people gave
him . . . no, it just never made sense to Mother. The pining never
stopped. His photos. His report cards. His track medals. His year-
book. The certificate he got as valedictorian. There were even toys
of Coleman's around, toys he'd loved as a small child, and she had
all these things and she stared at them the way a mind reader stares
into a crystal ball, as if they would unravel everything. Did he ever
acknowledge to anyone what he'd done? Did he, Mr. Zuckerman?
Did he ever acknowledge it to his wife? To his children?"

"I don't think so," I said. "I'm sure he didn't."
"So he was Coleman all the way. Set out to do it and did it. That

was the extraordinary thing about him from the time he was a
boy—that he stuck to a plan completely. There was a dogged com-
mitment he could make to his every decision. All the lying that was
necessitated by the big lie, to his family, to his colleagues, and he
stuck to it right to the end. Even to be buried as a Jew. Oh, Cole-
man," she said sadly, "so determined. Mr. Determined," and in that
moment, she was closer to laughter than to tears.

Buried as a Jew, I thought, and, if I was speculating correctly,

killed as a Jew. Another of the problems of impersonation.

THE  HUMAN  STAIN

"If he acknowledged it to anyone," I said, "maybe it was to the

woman he died with. To Faunia Farley."

She clearly didn't want to hear about that woman. But because of

her sensibleness, she had to ask, "How do you know that?"

"I don't. I don't know anything. It's a thought I have," I said. "It

ties into the pact that I sensed was between them—his telling her."
By "the pact between them" I meant their mutual recognition that
there was no clean way out, but I didn't go on to explain myself, not
to Ernestine. "Look, learning this from you today, there's nothing
about Coleman I don't have to rethink. I don't know what to think
about anything."

"Well then, you're now an honorary member of the Silk family.

Aside from Walter, in matters pertaining to Coleman none of us has
ever known what to think. Why he did it, why he stuck to it, why
Mother had to die the way she did. If Walt hadn't laid down the
law," she said, "who knows what would have evolved? Who knows if
Coleman wouldn't have told his wife as the years passed and he got
further from the decision? Maybe even told his children one day.
Maybe have told the world. But Walt froze everything in time. And
that is never a good idea. Coleman did this when he was still in his
twenties. A firecracker of twenty-seven. But he wasn't going to be
twenty-seven forever. It wasn't going to be 1953 forever. People age.
Nations age. Problems age. Sometimes they age right out of exis-
tence. Yet Walt froze it. Of course, if you look at it narrowly, from
the point of view simply of social advantage, of course it was ad-
vantageous in the well-spoken Negro middle class to do it Cole-
man's way, as it's advantageous today not to dream of doing it that
way. Today, if you're a middle-class intelligent Negro and you want
your kids to go to the best schools, and on full scholarship if you
need it, you wouldn't dream of saying that you're not colored. That
would be the last thing you'd do. White as your skin might be, now
it's advantageous not to do it, just as then it was advantageous to do
it. So what is the difference? But can I tell that to Walter? Can I say
to him, 'So what really is the difference?' First because of what
Coleman did to Mother, and second because in Walter's eyes there

THE   PURIFYING   RITUAL

was a fight to fight then, and Coleman didn't want to fight it—for
those reasons alone, I most certainly cannot. Though don't think
that over the years I haven't tried. Because Walter, in fact, is not a
harsh man. You want to hear about my brother Walter? In 1944
Walter was a twenty-one-year-old rifleman with a colored infantry
company. He was with another soldier from his outfit. They were
on a ridge in Belgium overlooking a valley that was cut through by
railroad tracks. They saw a German soldier walking east along the
tracks. He had a small bag slung over his shoulder and he was whis-
tling. The other soldier with Walter took aim. 'What the hell are
you doing?' Walter said to him. 'I'm going to kill him.' 'Why? Stop!
What's he doing? He's walking. He's probably walking home.' Wal-
ter had to wrestle the rifle away from this fellow. A kid from South
Carolina. They went down the ridge and they stopped the German
and they took him prisoner. Turned out he was walking home. He
had a leave, and the only way he knew to get back to Germany was
to follow the railroad tracks east. And it was Walter who saved his
life. How many soldiers ever did that? My brother Walter is a deter-
mined man who can be hard if he has to be, but he is also a human
being. It's because he's a human being that he believes that what you
do, you do to advance the race. And so I have tried with him, tried
sometimes by saying things to Walter that I only half believe my-
self. Coleman was a part of his time, I tell him. Coleman couldn't
wait to go through civil rights to get to his human rights, and so he
skipped a step. 'See him historically,' I say to Walt. 'You're a history
teacher—see him as a part of something larger.' I've told him, 'Nei-
ther of you just submitted to what you were given. Both of you are
fighters and both of you fought. You did battle your way and Cole-
man did battle his.' But that is a line of reasoning that has never
worked with Walter. Nothing has ever worked. That was Coleman's
way of becoming a man, I tell him—but he will not buy that. To
Walt, that was Coleman's way of not becoming a man. 'Sure,' he says
to me, 'sure. Your brother is more or less as he would have been, ex-
cept he would have been black. Except? Except? That except would
have changed everything.' Walt cannot see Coleman other than the

THE  HUMAN   STAIN

way he always has. And what can I do about that, Mr. Zuckerman?
Hate my brother Walt for what he did to Coleman by freezing our
family in time like that? Hate my brother Coleman for what he did
to Mother, for how he made the poor woman suffer down to the
very last day of her life? Because if I'm going to hate my two broth-
ers, why stop there? Why not hate my father for all the things that
he did wrong? Why not hate my late husband? I was not married to
a saint, I can assure you. I loved my husband, but I have clear vision.
And what about my son? There's a boy it would not be at all hard to
hate. He goes out of his way to make it easy for you. But the danger
with hatred is, once you start in on it, you get a hundred times
more than you bargained for. Once you start, you can't stop. I don't
know anything harder to control than hating. Easier to kick drink-
ing than to master hate. And that is saying something."

"Did you know before today," I asked her, "why it was that Cole-

man had resigned from the college?"

"I did not. I thought he'd reached a retirement age."
"He never told you."
"No."
"So you couldn't know what Keble was talking about."
"Not entirely."
So I told her about the spooks business, told her that whole story

then, and when I was finished she shook her head and said, straight
out, "I don't believe I've ever heard of anything more foolish being
perpetrated by an institution of higher learning. It sounds to me
more like a hotbed of ignorance. To persecute a college professor,
whoever he is, whatever color he might be, to insult him, to dis-
honor him, to rob him of his authority and his dignity and his pres-
tige for something as stupid and trivial as that. I am my father's
daughter, Mr. Zuckerman, the daughter of a father who was a stick-
ler for words, and with every passing day, the words that I hear spo-
ken strike me as less and less of a description of what things really
are. Sounds from what you've told me that anything is possible in a
college today. Sounds like the people there forgot what it is to teach.
Sounds like what they do is something closer to buffoonery. Every

time has its reactionary authorities, and here at Athena they are ap-
parently riding high. One has to be so terribly frightened of every
word one uses? What ever happened to the First Amendment of the
Constitution of the United States of America? In my childhood, as
in yours, it was recommended that each student who graduated
from high school in New Jersey get at graduation two things: a di-
ploma and a copy of the Constitution. Do you recall that? You had
to take a year of American history and a semester of economics—
as, of course, you have to no longer: 'have to' is just gone out of the
curriculum. At graduation it was traditional in many of our schools
in those days for the principal to hand you your diploma and
somebody else to give you a copy of the Constitution of the United
States. So few people today have a reasonably clear understanding
of the Constitution of the United States. But here in America, as far
as I can see, it's just getting more foolish by the hour. All these col-
leges starting these remedial programs to teach kids what they
should have learned in the ninth grade. In East Orange High they
stopped long ago reading the old classics. They haven't even heard
of Moby-Dick, much less read it. Youngsters were coming to me the
year I retired, telling me that for Black History Month they would
only read a biography of a black by a black. What difference, I
would ask them, if it's a black author or it's a white author? I'm im-
patient with Black History Month altogether. I liken having a Black
History Month in February and concentrating study on that to
milk that's just about to go sour. You can still drink it, but it just
doesn't taste right. If you're going to study and find out about Mat-
thew Henson, then it seems to me that you do Matthew Henson
when you do other explorers."

"I don't know who Matthew Henson is," I said to Ernestine, won-

dering if Coleman had known, if he had wanted to know, if not
wanting to know was one of the reasons he had made his decision.

"Mr. Zuckerman ..." she said, gently enough, but to shame me

nonetheless.

"Mr. Zuckerman was not exposed to Black History Month as a

youngster," I said.

"Who discovered the North Pole?" she asked me.
I suddenly liked her enormously, and the more so the more pe-

dantically teacherish she became. Though for different reasons, I
was beginning to like her as much as I had liked her brother. And I
saw now that if you'd put them side by side, it wouldn't have been at
all difficult to tell what Coleman was. Everyone knows... Oh, stu-
pid, stupid, stupid Delphine Roux. One's truth is known to no one,
and frequently—as in Delphine's very own case—to oneself least of
all. "I forget whether it was Peary or Cook," I said. "I forget which
one got to the North Pole first."

"Well, Henson got there before him. When it was reported in the

New York Times, he was given full credit. But now when they write
the history, all you hear about is Peary. It would have been the same
sort of thing if Sir Edmund Hillary were said to have gotten to the
top of Mount Everest and you didn't hear a word about Tenzing
Norkay. My point," said Ernestine, in her element now, all profes-
sional correctitude and instruction—and, unlike Coleman, every-
thing her father ever wanted her to be—"my point is, if you have a
course on health and whatever, then you do Dr. Charles Drew.
You've heard of him?"

"No."
"Shame on you, Mr. Zuckerman. I'll tell you in a minute. But you

do Dr. Drew when you have health. You don't put him in February.
You understand what I mean?"

"Yes."
"You learn about them when you study explorers and health

people and all the other people. But everything there now is black
this and black that. I let it wash over me the best I could, but it
wasn't easy. Years ago, East Orange High was excellent. Kids coming
out of East Orange High, especially out of the honors program,
would have their choice of colleges. Oh, don't get me started on this
subject. What happened to Coleman with that word 'spooks' is all
a part of the same enormous failure. In my parents' day and well
into yours and mine, it used to be the person who fell short. Now
it's the discipline. Reading the classics is too difficult, therefore it's

THE  PURIFYING  RITUAL

the classics that are to blame. Today the student asserts his incapac-
ity as a privilege. I can't learn it, so there is something wrong with it.
And there is something especially wrong with the bad teacher who
wants to teach it. There are no more criteria, Mr. Zuckerman, only
opinions. I often wrestle with this question of what everything used
to be. What education used to be. What East Orange High used to
be. What East Orange used to be. Urban renewal destroyed East Or-
ange, there's no doubt in my mind. They—the city fathers—talked
about all the great things that were going to happen because of this
urban renewal. It scared the merchants to death and the merchants
left, and the more the merchants left, the less business there was.
Then 280 and the parkway cut our little town in quarters. The park-
way eliminated Jones Street—the center of our colored community
the parkway eliminated altogether. Then 280. A devastating intru-
sion. What that did to that community! Because the highway had to
come through, the nice houses along Oraton Parkway, Elmwood
Avenue, Maple Avenue, the state just bought them up and they dis-
appeared overnight. I used to be able to do all my Christmas shop-
ping on Main Street. Well, Main Street and Central Avenue. Cen-
tral Avenue was called the Fifth Avenue of the Oranges then. You
know what we've got today? We've got a ShopRite. And we've got a
Dunkin' Donuts. And there was a Domino's Pizza, but they closed.
Now they've got another food place. And there's a cleaners. But you
can't compare quality. It's not the same. In all honesty, I drive up
the hill to West Orange to shop. But I didn't then. There was no rea-
son to. Every night when we went out to walk the dog, I'd go with
my husband, unless the weather was real bad—walk to Central Av-
enue, which is two blocks, then down Central Avenue for four
blocks, cross over, then window-shop back, and home. There was a
B. Altman. A Russek's. There was a Black, Starr, and Gorham. There
was a Bachrach, the photographer. A very nice men's store, Minks,
that was Jewish, that was over on Main Street. Two theaters. There
was the Hollywood Theater on Central Avenue. There was the
Palace Theater on Main Street. All of life was there in little East
Orange..."

THE   HUMAN   STAIN

All of life was there in East Orange. And when? Before. Before

urban renewal. Before the classics were abandoned. Before they
stopped giving out the Constitution to high school graduates. Be-
fore there were remedial classes in the colleges teaching kids what
they should have learned in ninth grade. Before Black History
Month. Before they built the parkway and brought in 280. Before
they persecuted a college professor for saying "spooks" to his class.
Before she drove up the hill to West Orange to shop. Before every-
thing changed, including Coleman Silk. That's when it all was dif-
ferent—before. And, she lamented, it will never be the same again,
not in East Orange or anywhere else in America.

At four, when I started out of my drive for the College Arms,

where she was staying, the afternoon light was ratcheting rapidly
down and the day, heavy now with fearsome clouds, had turned
into gusty November. That morning they'd buried Coleman—and
the morning before buried Faunia—in springlike weather, but now
everything was intent on announcing winter. And winter twelve
hundred feet up. Here it comes.

The impulse I had then, to tell Ernestine about the summer day

a mere four months earlier when Coleman had driven me out to
the dairy farm to watch Faunia do the five o'clock milking in the
late afternoon heat—that is, to watch him watching Faunia do the
milking—did not require much wisdom to suppress. Whatever was
missing from Ernestine's sense of Coleman's life, she was not driven
to discover. Intelligent as she was, she hadn't asked a single question
about how he had lived out his last months, let alone about what
might have caused him to die in the circumstance he did; good and
virtuous woman that she was, she preferred not to contemplate the
specific details of his destruction. Nor did she wish to inquire into
any biographical connection between the injunction to revolt that
had severed him from his family in his twenties and the furious de-
termination, some forty years on, with which he had disassociated
himself from Athena, as its pariah and renegade. Not that I was sure
there was any connection, any circuitry looping the one decision to

the other, but we could try to look and see, couldn't we? How did
such a man as Coleman come to exist? What is it that he was? Was
the idea he had for himself of lesser validity or of greater validity
than someone else's idea of what he was supposed to be? Can such
things even be known? But the concept of life as something whose
purpose is concealed, of custom as something that may not allow
for thought, of society as dedicated to a picture of itself that may be
badly flawed, of an individual as real apart and beyond the social
determinants defining him, which may indeed be what to him seem
most unreal—in short, every perplexity pumping the human imag-
ination seemed to lie somewhat outside her own unswerving alle-
giance to a canon of time-honored rules.

"I have not read any of your books," she told me in the car. "I

tend to lean toward mysteries these days, and English mysteries. But
when I get home, I plan to take out something of yours."

"You haven't told me who Dr. Charles Drew was."
"Dr. Charles Drew," she told me, "discovered how to prevent

blood from clotting so it could be banked. Then he was injured in
an automobile accident, and the hospital that was nearest would
not take colored, and he died by bleeding to death."

That was the whole of our conversation during the twenty min-

utes it took to drive down the mountain and into town. The tor-
rent of disclosure was over. Ernestine had said all there was to say.
With the result that the harshly ironic fate of Dr. Drew took on a
significance—a seemingly special relevance to Coleman and his
harshly ironic fate—that was no less disturbing for being impon-
derable.

I couldn't imagine anything that could have made Coleman

more of a mystery to me than this unmasking. Now that I knew ev-
erything, it was as though I knew nothing, and instead of what I'd
learned from Ernestine unifying my idea of him, he became not
just an unknown but an uncohesive person. In what proportion, to
what degree, had his secret determined his daily life and permeated
his everyday thinking? Did it alter over the years from being a hot

secret to being a cool secret to being a forgotten secret of no impor-
tance, something having to do with a dare he'd taken, a wager made
to himself way back when? Did he get, from his decision, the adven-
ture he was after, or was the decision in itself the adventure? Was it
the misleading that provided his pleasure, the carrying off of the
stunt that he liked best, the traveling through life incognito, or had
he simply been closing the door to a past, to people, to a whole race
that he wanted nothing intimate or official to do with? Was it the
social obstruction that he wished to sidestep? Was he merely being
another American and, in the great frontier tradition, accepting the
democratic invitation to throw your origins overboard if to do so
contributes to the pursuit of happiness? Or was it more than that?
Or was it less? How petty were his motives? How pathological? And
suppose they were both—what of it? And suppose they weren't—
what of that? By the time I met him, was the secret merely the tinc-
ture barely tinting the coloration of the man's total being or was the
totality of his being nothing but a tincture in the shoreless sea of a
lifelong secret? Did he ever relax his vigilance, or was it like being a
fugitive forever? Did he ever get over the fact that he couldn't get
over the fact that he was pulling it off—that he could meet the
world with his strength intact after doing what he had done, that he
could appear to everyone, as he did appear, to be so easily at home
in his own skin? Assume that, yes, at a certain point the balance
shifted toward the new life and the other one receded, but did he
ever completely get over the fear of exposure and the sense that he
was going to be found out? When he had come to me first, crazed
with the sudden loss of his wife, the murder of his wife as he con-
ceived it, the formidable wife with whom he'd always struggled
but to whom his devotion once again became profound in the in-
stant of her death, when he came barging through my door in the
clutches of the mad idea that because of her death I should write
his book for him, was his lunacy not itself in the nature of a coded
confession? Spooks! To be undone by a word that no one even
speaks anymore. To hang him on that was, for Coleman, to banalize
everything—the elaborate clockwork of his lie, the beautiful cali-

THE  PURIFYING   RITUAL

bration of his deceit, everything. Spooks! The ridiculous trivial-
ization of this masterly performance that had been his seemingly
conventional, singularly subtle life—a life of little, if anything ex-
cessive on the surface because all the excess goes into the secret. No
wonder the accusation of racism blew him sky high. As though his
accomplishment were rooted in nothing but shame. No wonder all
the accusations blew him sky high. His crime exceeded anything
and everything they wanted to lay on him. He said "spooks," he
has a girlfriend half his age—it's all kid stuff. Such pathetic, such
petty, such ridiculous transgressions, so much high school yam-
mering to a man who, on his trajectory outward, had, among other
things, done what he'd had to do to his mother, to go there and,
in behalf of his heroic conception of his life, to tell her, "It's over.
This love affair is over. You're no longer my mother and never
were." Anybody who has the audacity to do that doesn't just want
to be white. He wants to be able to do that. It has to do with more
than just being blissfully free. It's like the savagery in The Iliad,
Coleman's favorite book about the ravening spirit of man. Each
murder there has its own quality, each a more brutal slaughter than
the last.

And yet, after that, he had the system beat. After that, he'd done

it: never again lived outside the protection of the walled city that is
convention. Or, rather, lived, at the same moment, entirely within
and, surreptitiously, entirely beyond, entirely shut out—that was
the fullness of his particular life as a created self. Yes, he'd had it
beat for so very long, right down to all the kids being born white—
and then he didn't. Blindsided by the uncontrollability of some-
thing else entirely. The man who decides to forge a distinct histori-
cal destiny, who sets out to spring the historical lock, and who does
so, brilliantly succeeds at altering his personal lot, only to be en-
snared by the history he hadn't quite counted on: the history that
isn't yet history, the history that the clock is now ticking off, the
history proliferating as I write, accruing a minute at a time and
grasped better by the future than it will ever be by us. The we that is
inescapable: the present moment, the common lot, the current

mood, the mind of one's country, the stranglehold of history that is
one's own time. Blindsided by the terrifyingly provisional nature of
everything.

When we reached South Ward Street and I parked the car outside
the College Arms, I said, "I'd like to meet Walter sometime. I'd like
to talk to Walter about Coleman."

"Walter hasn't mentioned Coleman's name since nineteen hun-

dred and fifty-six. He won't talk about Coleman. As white a college
as there was in New England, and that's where Coleman made his
career. As white a subject as there was in the curriculum, and that's
what Coleman chose to teach. To Walter, Coleman is more white
than the whites. There is nothing beyond that for him to say."

"Will you tell him Coleman's dead? Will you tell him where

you've been?"

"No. Not unless he asks."
"Will you contact Coleman's children?"
"Why would I?" she asked. "It was for Coleman to tell them. It's

not up to me."

"Why did you tell me, then?"
"I didn't tell you. You introduced yourself at the cemetery. You

said to me, 'You're Coleman's sister.' I said yes. I simply spoke the
truth. I'm not the one with something to hide." This was as severe
as she had been with me all afternoon—and with Coleman. Till
that moment she had balanced herself scrupulously between the
ruination of the mother and the outrage of the brother.

Here she drew a wallet out of her handbag. She unfolded the wal-

let to show me one of the snapshots that were tucked into a plastic
sleeve. "My parents," she said. "After World War I. He'd just come
back from France."

Two young people in front of a brick stoop, the petite young

woman in a large hat and a long summer dress and the tall young
man in his full-dress army uniform, with visored cap, leather ban-
doleer, leather gloves, and high sleek leather boots. They were pale

THE  PURIFYING   RITUAL

but they were Negroes. How could you tell they were Negroes? By
little more than that they had nothing to hide.

"Handsome young fellow. Especially in that outfit," I said.

"Could be a cavalry uniform."

"Straight infantry," she said.
"Your mother I can't see as well. Your mother's a bit shaded by

the hat."

"One can do only so much to control one's life," Ernestine said,

and with that, a summary statement as philosophically potent as
any she cared to make, she returned the wallet to her handbag,
thanked me for lunch, and, gathering herself almost visibly back
into that orderly, ordinary existence that rigorously distanced itself
from delusionary thinking, whether white or black or in between,
she left the car. Instead of my then heading home, I drove cross-
town to the cemetery and, after parking on the street, walked in
through the gate, and not quite knowing what was happening,
standing in the falling darkness beside the uneven earth mound
roughly heaped over Coleman's coffin, I was completely seized by
his story, by its end and by its beginning, and, then and there, I be-
gan this book.

I began by wondering what it had been like when Coleman had

told Faunia the truth about that beginning—assuming that he ever
had; assuming, that is, that he had to have. Assuming that what he
could not outright say to me on the day he burst in all but shouting,
"Write my story, damn you!" and what he could not say to me when
he had to abandon (because of the secret, I now realized) writing
the story himself, he could not in the end resist confessing to her, to
the college cleaning woman who'd become his comrade-in-arms,
the first and last person since Ellie Magee for whom he could strip
down and turn around so as to expose, protruding from his naked
back, the mechanical key by which he had wound himself up to
set off on his great escapade. Ellie, before her Steena, and finally
Faunia. The only woman never to know his secret is the woman he
spent his life with, his wife. Why Faunia? As it is a human thing to

THE  HUMAN  STAIN

have a secret, it is also a human thing, sooner or later, to reveal it.
Even, as in this case, to a woman who doesn't ask questions, who,
you would think, would be quite a gift to a man in possession of
just such a secret. But even to her—especially to her. Because her
not asking questions isn't because she's dumb or doesn't want to
face things; her not asking him questions is, in Coleman's eyes, at
one with her devastated dignity.

"I admit that may not be at all correct," I said to my utterly trans-

formed friend, "I admit that none of it may be. But here goes any-
way: when you were trying to find out if she'd been a hooker ...
when you were trying to uncover her secret. . ." Out there at his
grave, where everything he ever was would appear to have been
canceled out by the weight and mass of all that dirt if by nothing
else, I waited and I waited for him to speak until at last I heard him
asking Faunia what was the worst job she'd ever had. Then I waited
again, waited some more, until little by little I picked up the sassy
vibrations of that straight-out talk that was hers. And that is how
all this began: by my standing alone in a darkening graveyard and
entering into professional competition with death.

"After the kids, after the fire," I heard her telling him, "I was tak-

ing any job I could. I didn't know what I was doing back then. I was
in a fog. Well, there was this suicide," Faunia said. "This was up in
the woods outside of Blackwell. With a shotgun. Bird shot. Body
was gone. A woman I knew, this boozer, Sissie, called me to come
up and help her. She was going up there to clean the place out. 'I
know this is going to sound odd,' Sissie says to me, 'but I know you
have a strong stomach and you can handle things. Can you help me
do this?' There was a man and woman living there, and their chil-
dren, and they had an argument, and he went in the other room
and blew his brains out. 'I'm going up there to clean it out,' Sissie
says, so I went up there with her. I needed the money, and I didn't
know what I was doing anyway, so I went. The smell of death.
That's what I remember. Metallic. Blood. The smell. It came out
only when we started cleaning. You couldn't get the full effect until
the warm water hit the blood. This place is a log cabin. Blood on

the walls everywhere. Ba-boom, he's all over the walls, all over ev-
erything. Once the warm water and disinfectant hit it... whew. I
had rubber gloves, I had to put on a mask, because even / couldn't
take this anymore. Also chunks of bone on the wall, stuck in with
the blood. Put the gun in his mouth. Ba-boom. Tendency to get
bone and teeth out there too. Seeing it. There it all was. I remember
looking at Sissie. I looked at her and she was shaking her head.
'Why the fuck are we doing this for any amount of money?' We
finished the job as best we could. A hundred dollars an hour. Which
I still don't think was enough."

"What would have been the right price?" I heard Coleman asking

Faunia.

"A thousand. Burn the fucking place down. There was no right

price. Sissie went outside. She couldn't handle it anymore. But me,
two little kids dead, maniac Lester following me everywhere, on my
case day and night, who cares? I started snooping. Because I can be
that way. I wanted to know why the hell this guy had done it. It's al-
ways fascinated me. Why people kill themselves. Why there are
mass murderers. Death in general. Just fascinating. Looked at the
pictures. Looked if there was any happiness there. Looked at the
whole place. Until I got to the medicine cabinet. The drugs. The
bottles. No happiness there. His own little pharmacy. I figure psy-
chiatric drugs. Stuff that should have been taken and hadn't. It
was clear that he was trying to get help, but he couldn't do it. He
couldn't take the medication."

"How do you know this?" Coleman asked.
"I'm assuming. I don't know. This is my own story. This is my

story."

"Maybe he took the stuff and he killed himself anyway."
"Could be," she said. "The blood. Blood sticks. You could not

possibly get the blood off the floor. Towel after towel after towel.
Still had that color. Eventually it turned more and more a salmon
color, but you still couldn't get it out. Like something still alive.
Heavy-duty disinfectant—didn't help. Metallic. Sweet. Sickening. I
don't gag. Put my mind above it. But I came close."

"How long did it take?" he asked her.
"We were there for about five hours. I was playing amateur de-

tective. He was in his mid-thirties. I don't know what he did. Sales-
man or something. He was a woodsy-type personality. Mountain
type. Big beard. Bushy hair. She was petite. Sweet face. Light skin.
Dark hair. Dark eyes. Very mousy. Intimidated. This is only what
I'm getting from the pictures. He was the big strong mountain type
and she's this little mousy person. I don't know. But I want to know.
I was an emancipated minor. Dropped out of school. I could not go
to school. Aside from everything else, it was boring. All this real
stuff was happening in people's houses. Sure as shit happening in
my house. How could I go to school and learn what the capital of
Nebraska was? I wanted to know. I wanted to get out and look
around. That's why I went to Florida, and that's how I wound up
all over, and that's why I snooped about that house. Just to look
around. I wanted to know the worst. What is the worst? You know?
She was there at the time he did it. By the time we got there, she was
under psychiatric care."

"Is that the worst thing you've ever had to do? The worst work

you've ever had to do?"

"Grotesque. Yes. I've seen a lot of stuff. But that thing—it wasn't

that it was only grotesque. On the other hand, it was fascinating. I
wanted to know why."

She wanted to know what is the worst. Not the best, the worst. By

which she meant the truth. What is the truth? So he told it to her.
First woman since Ellie to find out. First anyone since Ellie. Because
he loved her at that moment, imagining her scrubbing the blood. It
was the closest he ever felt to her. Could it be? It was the closest
Coleman ever felt to anyone! He loved her. Because that is when
you love somebody—when you see them being game in the face of
the worst. Not courageous. Not heroic. Just game. He had no reser-
vations about her. None. It was beyond thinking or calculating. It
was instinctive. A few hours later it might turn out to be a very bad
idea, but at that moment, no. He trusts her—that's what it is. He

trusts her: she scrubbed the blood off the floor. She's not religious,
she's not sanctimonious, she is not deformed by the fairy tale of pu-
rity, whatever other perversions may have disfigured her. She's not
interested in judging—she's seen too much for all that shit. She's
not going to run away like Steena, whatever I say. "What would you
think," he asked her, "if I told you I wasn't a white man?"

At first she just looked at him, if stupefied, stupefied for a split

second and no more. Then she started laughing, burst into the
laughter that was her trademark. "What would I think? I would
think you were telling me something that I figured out a long time
ago."

"That isn't so."
"Oh, isn't it? I know what you are. I lived down south. I met 'em

all. Sure, I know. Why else could I possibly like you so much? Be-
cause you're a college professor? I'd go out of my mind if that was
you."

"I don't believe you, Faunia."
"Suit yourself," she said. "You done with your inquiry?"
"What inquiry?"
"About the worst job I ever had."
"Sure," he said. And then waited for her inquiry about his not be-

ing white. But it never came. She didn't really seem to care. And she
didn't run away. When he told her the whole story, she listened all
right, but not because she found it incredible or unbelievable or
even strange—it certainly wasn't reprehensible. No. It sounded just
like life to her.

In February, I got a call from Ernestine, maybe because it was Black
History Month and she remembered having to identify for me
Matthew Henson and Dr. Charles Drew. Maybe she was thinking
that it was time for her to take up again my education in race,
touching particularly on everything that Coleman had cut himself
off from, a full-to-the-brimming ready-made East Orange world,
four square miles rich in the most clinging creaturely detail, the
solid, lyrical bedrock of a successful boyhood, all the safeguards,

the allegiances, the battles, the legitimacy simply taken for granted,
nothing theoretical about it, nothing specious or illusory about
it—all the blissful stuff of a happy beginning throbbing with excite-
ment and common sense that her brother Coleman had blotted
out.

To my surprise, after telling me that Walter Silk and his wife

would be up from Asbury Park on Sunday, she said that, if I didn't
mind driving to Jersey, I was welcome to come for Sunday dinner.
"You wanted to meet Walt. And I thought you might like to see
the house. There are photograph albums. There's Coleman's room,
where Coleman and Walter slept. The twin beds are still there. It
was my boy's room after them, but the same maple frames are still
right there."

I was being invited to see the Family Silk plenty that Coleman

jettisoned, as though it were his bondage, in order to live within a
sphere commensurate with his sense of his scale—in order to be-
come somebody other, somebody who suited him, and make his
destiny by being subjugated by something else. Jettisoned it all, the
whole ramified Negro thing, thinking that he could not displace it
by any other means. So much yearning, so much plotting and pas-
sion and subtlety and dissembling, all of it feeding the hunger to
leave the house and be transformed.

To become a new being. To bifurcate. The drama that underlies

America's story, the high drama that is upping and leaving—and
the energy and cruelty that rapturous drive demands.

Td like to come," I said.
"I can't guarantee anything," she said. "But you're a grown man.

You can look after yourself."

I laughed. "What are you telling me?"
"Walter may be getting up on eighty, but he is still a large and

roaring furnace. What he says you're not going to like."

"About whites?"
"About Coleman. About the calculating liar. About the heartless

son. About the traitor to his race."

"You told him he was dead."

"I decided to. Yes, I told Walter. We're a family. I told him every-

thing."

A few days later, a photograph arrived in the mail with a note

from Ernestine: "I came upon this and thought of our visit. Please
keep it, if you like, as a memento of your friend Coleman Silk." It
was a faded black-and-white photograph measuring about four by
five inches, a blown-up snapshot, more than likely taken originally
in somebody's backyard with a Brownie box camera, of Coleman as
the fighting machine that his opponent will find facing him when
the bell sounds. He couldn't have been more than fifteen, though
with those small carved features that in the man had been so engag-
ingly boyish looking mannishly adult in the boy. He sports, like a
pro, the whammy glare, the unwavering gaze of the prowling carni-
vore, everything eradicated but the appetite for victory and the
finesse to destroy. That look is level, issuing straight out of him like
a command, even while the sharp little chin is steeply tucked into
the skinny shoulder. His gloves are at the ready in the classic posi-
tion—out in front as though loaded not merely with fists but with
all the momentum of his one and a half decades—and each is
larger in circumference than his face. One gets the subliminal sense
of a kid with three heads. I am a boxer, the menacing pose cockily
announces, I don't knock 'em out—I cut 'em up. I outclass 'em till
they stop the fight. Unmistakably the brother she had christened Mr.
Determined; indeed, "Mr. Determined," in what must have been
Ernestine's girlhood hand, was inscribed in faint blue fountain-pen
ink across the back of the picture.

She's something too, I thought, and found a clear plastic frame

for the boy boxer and set him on my writing desk. The audacity of
that family did not begin and end with Coleman. It's a bold gift, I
thought, from a deceptively bold woman. I wondered what she had
in mind by inviting me to the house. I wondered what I might have
in mind by accepting the invitation. Strange to think that Cole-
man's sister and I had been taken so by each other's company—
though strange only if you remembered that everything about
Coleman was ten, twenty, a hundred thousand times stranger.

Ernestine's invitation, Coleman's photograph—this was how I

came to set out for East Orange on the first February Sunday after
the Senate had voted not to remove Bill Clinton from office, and
how I came to be on a remote mountain road that ordinarily I
never take on my local back-and-forth driving but that serves as a
shortcut from my house to Route 7. And that was how I came to
notice, parked at the edge of a wide field I would otherwise have
shot right by, the dilapidated gray pickup truck with the POW/MIA
bumper sticker that, I was sure, had to be Les Farley's. I saw that
pickup, somehow knew it was his, and unable just to keep on going,
incapable of recording its presence and continuing on, I braked to a
halt. I backed up until my car was in front of his, and, at the side of
the road, I parked.

I suppose I was never altogether convinced that I was doing what

I was doing—otherwise how could I have done it?—but it was by
then nearly three months during which time Coleman Silk's life
had become closer to me than my own, and so it was unthinkable
that I should be anywhere other than there in the cold, atop that
mountain, standing with my gloved hand on the hood of the very
vehicle that had come barreling down the wrong side of the road
and sent Coleman swerving through the guardrail and, with Faunia
beside him, into the river on the evening before his seventy-second
birthday. If this was the murder weapon, the murderer couldn't be
far away.

When I realized where I was headed—and thought again of how

surprising it was to hear from Ernestine, to be asked to meet Walter,
to be thinking all day and often into the night about someone I'd
known for less than a year and never as the closest of friends—
the course of events seemed logical enough. This is what happens
when you write books. There's not just something that drives you
to find out everything—something begins putting everything in
your path. There is suddenly no such thing as a back road that
doesn't lead headlong into your obsession.

And so you do what I was doing. Coleman, Coleman, Coleman,

you who are now no one now run my existence. Of course you

THE  PURIFYING  RITUAL

could not write the book. You'd written the book—the book was
your life. Writing personally is exposing and concealing at the same
time, but with you it could only be concealment and so it would
never work. Your book was your life—and your art? Once you set
the thing in motion, your art was being a white man. Being, in your
brother's words, "more white than the whites." That was your sin-
gular act of invention: every day you woke up to be what you had
made yourself.

There was hardly any snow left on the ground, only patches of it

cobwebbing the stubble of the open field, no trail to follow, so I
started bang across to the other side, where there was a thin wall of
trees, and through the trees I could see another field, so I kept going
until I reached the second field, and I crossed that, and through an-
other, a deeper wall of trees, thick with high evergreens, and there
at the other side was the shining eye of a frozen lake, oval and
pointed at either end, with snow-freckled brownish hills rising all
around it and the mountains, caressable-looking, curving away in
the distance. Having walked some five hundred yards from the
road, I'd intruded upon—no, trespassed upon; it was almost an
unlawful sense that I had... I'd trespassed upon a setting as
pristine, I would think, as unviolated, as serenely unspoiled, as
envelops any inland body of water in New England. It gave you an
idea, as such places do—as they're cherished for doing—of what
the world was like before the advent of man. The power of nature
is sometimes very calming, and this was a calming place, calling a
halt to your trivial thinking without, at the same time, overawing
you with reminders of the nothingness of a life span and the
vastness of extinction. It was all on a scale safely this side of the
sublime. A man could absorb the beauty into his being without
feeling belittled or permeated by fear.

Almost midway out on the ice there was a solitary figure in

brown coveralls and a black cap seated on a low yellow bucket,
bending over an ice hole with an abbreviated fishing rod in his
gloved hands. I didn't step onto the ice until I saw that he'd looked
up and spotted me. I didn't want to come upon him unawares, or in

any way look as though I intended to, not if the fisherman really
was Les Farley. If this was Les Farley, he wasn't someone you
wanted to take by surprise.

Of course I thought about turning back. I thought about head-

ing back to the road, about getting into my car, about proceeding
on to Route 7 South and down through Connecticut to 684 and
from there onto the Garden State Parkway. I thought about getting
a look at Coleman's bedroom. I thought about getting a look at
Coleman's brother, who, for what Coleman did, could not stop hat-
ing him even after his death. I thought about that and nothing else
all the way across the ice to get my look at Coleman's killer. Right
up to the point where I said, "Hi. How's it goin'?" I thought: Steal
up on him or don't steal up on him, it makes no difference. You're
the enemy either way. On this empty, ice-whitened stage, the only
enemy.

"The fish biting?" I said.
"Oh, not too good, not too bad." He did no more than glance my

way before focusing his attention back on the ice hole, one of
twelve or fifteen identical holes cut into rock-hard ice and spread
randomly across some forty or so square feet of lake. Most likely the
holes had been drilled by the device that was lying just a few steps
away from his yellow bucket, which was itself really a seven-gallon
detergent pail. The drilling device consisted of a metal shaft about
four feet long ending in a wide, cylindrical length of corkscrew
blade, a strong, serious boring tool whose imposing bit—rotated by
turning the cranked handle at the top—glittered like new in the
sunlight. An auger.

"It serves its purpose," he mumbled. "Passes the time."
It was as though I weren't the first but more like the fiftieth per-
son who'd happened out on the ice midway across a lake five hun-
dred yards from a backcountry road in the rural highlands to ask
about the fishing. As he wore a black wool watch cap pulled low on
his forehead and down over his ears, and as he sported a dark, gray-
ing chin beard and a thickish mustache, there was only a narrow
band of face on display. If it was remarkable in any way, that was

THE  PURIFYING  RITUAL

because of its broadness—on the horizontal axis, an open oblong
plain of a face. His dark eyebrows were long and thick, his eyes were
blue and noticeably widely spaced, while centered above the mus-
tache was the unsprouted, bridgeless nose of a kid. In just this
band of himself Farley exposed between the whiskered muzzle
and the woolen cap, all kinds of principles were at work, geomet-
ric and psychological both, and none seemed congruent with the
others.

"Beautiful spot," I said.
"Why I'm here."
"Peaceful."
"Close to God," he said.
"Yes? You feel that?"
Now he shed the outer edge, the coating of his inwardness, shed

something of the mood in which I'd caught him, and looked as if
he were ready to link up with me as more than just a meaningless
distraction. His posture didn't change—still very much fishing
rather than gabbing—but at least a little of the antisocial aura was
dissipated by a richer, more ruminative voice than I would have ex-
pected. Thoughtful, you might even call it, though in a drastically
impersonal way.

"It's way up on top of a mountain," he said. "There's no houses

anywhere. No dwellings. There's no cottages on the lake." After each
declaration, a brooding pause—declarative observation, super-
charged silence. It was anybody's guess, at the end of a sentence,
whether or not he was finished with you. "Don't have a lot of activ-
ity out here. Don't have a lot of noise. Thirty acres of lake about.
None of those guys with their power augers. None of their noise
and the stink of their gasoline. Seven hundred acres of just open
good land and woods. It's just a beautiful area. Just peace and quiet.
And clean. It's a clean place. Away from all the hustle and bustle and
craziness that goes on." Finally the upward glance to take me in. To
assess me. A quick look that was ninety percent opaque and un-
readable and ten percent alarmingly transparent. I couldn't see
where there was any humor in this man.

THE  HUMAN   STAIN

"As long as I can keep it secret," he said, "it'll stay the way it is."
"True enough," I said.
"They live in cities. They live in the hustle and bustle of the work

routine. The craziness goin' to work. The craziness at work. The
craziness comin' home from work. The traffic. The congestion.
They're caught up in that. I'm out of it."

I hadn't to ask who "they" were. I might live far from any city, I

might not own a power auger, but I was they, we all were they, ev-
eryone but the man hunkered down on this lake jiggling the short-
ish fishing rod in his hand and talking into a hole in the ice, by
choice communicating less with me—as they—than to the frigid
water beneath us.

"Maybe a hiker'll come through here, or a cross-country skier, or

someone like you. Spots my vehicle, somehow they spot me out
here, so they'll come my way, and seems like when you're out on the
ice—people like you who don't fish—" and here he looked up to
take in again, to divine, gnostically, my unpardonable theyness.
"I'm guessin' you don't fish."

"I don't. No. Saw your truck. Just driving around on a beautiful

day."

"Well, they're like you," he told me, as though there'd been no

uncertainty about me from the time I'd appeared on the shore.
"They'll always come over if they see a fisherman, and they're curi-
ous, and they'll ask what he caught, you know. So what I'll do ..."
But here the mind appeared to come to a halt, stopped by his think-
ing, What am I doing? What the hell am I going on about? When he
started up again, my heart all at once started racing with fear. Now
that his fishing has been ruined, I thought, he's decided to have
some fun with me. He's into his act now. He's out of the fishing and
into being Les and all the many things that is and is not.

"So what I'll do," he resumed, "if I have fish layin' on the ice, I'll

do what I did when I saw you. I'll pick all the fish up right away that
I caught and I'll put 'em in a plastic bag and put 'em in my bucket,
the bucket I'm sittin' on. So now the fish are concealed. And when
the people come over and say, 'How are they bitin',' I say, 'Nothin'.
I

don't think there's anything in here.' I caught maybe thirty fish al-
ready. Excellent day. But I'll tell 'em, 'Naw, I'm gettin' ready to leave.
I been here two hours and I haven't gotten a bite yet.' Every time
they'll just turn around and leave. They'll go somewhere else. And
they'll spread the word that that pond up there is no good. That's
how secret it is. Maybe I end up tending to be a little dishonest. But
this place is like the best-kept secret in the whole world."

"And now I know," I said. I saw that there was no possible way to

get him to laugh along conspiratorially at his dissembling with in-
terlopers like myself, no way I was going to get him to ease up by
smiling at what he'd said, and so I didn't try. I realized that though
nothing may have passed between us of a truly personal nature, by
his decision, if not mine, we two were further along than smiling
could help. I was in a conversation that, out in this remote, se-
cluded, frozen place, seemed suddenly to be of the greatest impor-
tance. "I also know you're sitting on a slew of fish," I said. "In that
bucket. How many today?"

"Well, you look like a man who can keep a secret. About thirty,

thirty-five fish. Yeah, you look like an upright man. I think I recog-
nize you anyway. Aren't you the author?"

"That I am."
"Sure. I know where you live. Across from the swamp where the

heron is. Dumouchel's place. Dumouchel's cabin there."

"Dumouchel's who I bought it from. So tell me, since I'm a man

who can keep a secret, why are you sitting right here and not over
there? This whole big frozen lake. How'd you choose this one spot
to fish?" Even if he really wasn't doing everything he could to keep
me there, I seemed on my own to be doing everything I could not
to leave.

"Well, you never know," he told me. "You start out where you got

'em the last time. If you caught fish the last time, you always start
out at that spot."

"So that solves that. I always wondered." Go now, I thought.

That's all the conversation necessary. More than is necessary. But
the thought of who he was drew me on. The fact of him drew me

THE  HUMAN  STAIN

on. This was not speculation. This was not meditation. This was
not that way of thinking that is fiction writing. This was the thing
itself. The laws of caution that, outside my work, had ruled my life
so strictly for the last five years were suddenly suspended. I couldn't
turn back while crossing the ice and now I couldn't turn and flee.
It had nothing to do with courage. It had nothing to do with reason
or logic. Here he is. That's all it had to do with. That and my fear. In
his heavy brown coveralls and his black watch cap and his thick-
soled black rubber boots, with his two big hands in a hunter's (or a
soldier's) camouflage-colored fingertipless gloves, here is the man
who murdered Coleman and Faunia. I'm sure of it. They didn't
drive off the road and into the river. Here is the killer. He is the one.
How can I go?

"Fish always there?" I asked him. "When you return to your spot

from the time before?"

"No, sir. The fish move in schools. Underneath the ice. One day

they'll be at the north end of the pond, the next day they might be
at the south end of the pond. Maybe sometimes two times in a row
they'll be at that same spot. They'll still be there. What they tend to
do, the fish tend to school up and they don't move very much, be-
cause the water's so cold. They're able to adjust to water tempera-
ture, and the water being so cold, they don't move so much and
they don't require as much food. But if you get in an area where the
fish are schooled up, you will catch a lot of fish. But some days
you can go out in the same pond—you can never cover the entire
thing—so you might try about five or six different places, drill
holes, and never get a hit. Never catch a fish. You just didn't locate
the school. And so you just sit here."

"Close to God," I said.
"You got it."
His fluency—because it was the last thing I was expecting—fas-

cinated me, as did the thoroughness with which he was willing to
explain the life in a pond when the water's cold. How did he know I
was "the author"? Did he also know I was Coleman's friend? Did he

THE  PURIFYING  RITUAL

also know I was at Faunia's funeral? I supposed there were now as
many questions in his mind about me—and my mission here—as
there were in mine about him. This great bright arched space, this
cold aboveground vault of a mountaintop cradling at its peak a
largish oval of fresh water frozen hard as rock, the ancient activity
that is the life of a lake, that is the formation of ice, that is the me-
tabolism of fish, all the soundless, ageless forces unyieldingly work-
ing away—it is as though we have encountered each other at the
top of the world, two hidden brains mistrustfully ticking, mutual
hatred and paranoia the only introspection there is anywhere.

"And so what do you think about," I asked, "if you don't get a

fish? What do you think about when they're not biting?"

"Tell you what I was just thinking about. I was thinking a lot of

things. I was thinking about Slick Willie. I was thinking about our
president—his freakin' luck. I was thinkin' about this guy who gets
off everything, and I was thinkin' about the guys who didn't get off
nothin'. Who didn't dodge the draft and didn't get off. It doesn't
seem right."

"Vietnam," I said.
"Yeah. We'd go up in the freakin' helicopters—in my second tour

I was a door gunner—and what I was thinking about was this one
time we went into North Vietnam to pick up these two pilots. I was
sitting out here thinking about that time. Slick Willie. That son of
a bitch. Thinkin' about that scumbag son of a bitch gettin' his
dick sucked in the Oval Office on the taxpayer's money, and then
thinkin' about these two pilots, they were on an air strike over Ha-
noi harbor, these guys were hit real bad, and we picked up the signal
on the radio. We weren't even a rescue helicopter, but we were in
the vicinity, and they were giving a mayday that they were goin' to
bail out, because they were at the altitude point where if they didn't
bail out they were goin' to crash. We weren't even a rescue helicop-
ter—we were a gunship—we were just taking a chance that we
could save a couple of lives. We didn't even get permission to get up
there, we just went. You act on instinct like that. We just all agreed,

two door gunners, the pilot, the copilot, though the chances weren't
that good because we had no cover. But we went in anyway—to try
to pick 'em up."

He's telling me a war story, I thought. He knows he's doing it.

There's a point here that he's going to make. Something he wants
me to carry away with me, to the shore, to my car, to the house
whose location he knows and wishes me to understand that he
knows. To carry away as "the author"? Or as somebody else—
somebody who knows a secret of his that is even bigger than the se-
cret of this pond. He wants me to know that not many people have
seen what he's seen, been where he's been, done what he's done and,
if required to, can do again. He's murdered in Vietnam and he's
brought the murderer back with him to the Berkshires, back with
him from the country of war, the country of horror, to this com-
pletely uncomprehending other place.

The auger out on the ice. The candor of the auger. There could

be no more solid embodiment of our hatred than the merciless
steel look of that auger out in the middle of nowhere.

"We figure, okay, we're gonna die, we're gonna die. So we went

up there and we homed in on their signals, we saw one parachute,
and we went down in the clearing, and we picked that guy up with
no trouble at all. He jumped right in, we dragged him right in and
took off, no opposition whatsoever. So we said to him, 'You have
any idea?' and he said, 'Well, he drifted off that way.' So we went up
in the air, but by then they knew we were there. We went over a little
farther looking for the other parachute, and all freakin' hell broke
loose. I'm telling you, it was unbelievable. We never picked up the
other guy. The helicopter was gettin' hit like you wouldn't believe it.
Ting ping ping boom. Machine guns. Ground fire. We just had to
turn around and get the hell out of there as fast as we could. And I
remember the guy we picked up started to cry. This is what I'm get-
ting at. He was a navy pilot. They were off the Forrestal And he
knew the other guy was either killed or captured, and he started to
bawl. It was horrible for him. His buddy. But we couldn't go back.
We couldn't risk the chopper and five guys. We were lucky we got

one. So we got back to our base and we got out and we looked at the
chopper and there were a hundred and fifty-one bullet holes in it.
Never hit a hydraulic line, a fuel line, but the rotors were all pinged
up, a lot of bullets hit the rotors. Bent them a little bit. If they hit
the tail rotor, you go right down, but they didn't. You know they
shot down five thousand helicopters during that war? Twenty-eight
hundred jet fighters we lost. They lost two hundred fifty B-52s in
high-altitude bombing over North Vietnam. But the government'll
never tell you that. Not that. They tell you what they want to tell
you. Never Slick Willie who gets caught. It's the guy who served
who gets caught. Over and over. Nope, doesn't seem right. You
know what I was thinking? I was thinking that if I had a son he'd be
out here with me now. Ice fishin'. That's what I was thinking when
you walked out here. I looked up and I saw someone comin', and
I'm sort of daydreamin', and I thought, That could be my son. Not
you, not a man like you, but my son."

"Don't you have a son?"
"No."
"Never married?" I asked.
This time he didn't answer me right off. He looked at me, homed

in on me as though I had a signal that was going off like the two pi-
lots bailing out, but he didn't answer me. Because he knows, I
thought. He knows I was at Faunia's funeral. Somebody told him
that "the author" was there. What kind of author does he think I
am? An author who writes books about crimes like his? An author
who writes books about murderers and murder?

"Doomed," he said finally, staring back into the hole and jiggling

his rod, jerking it with a flick of his wrist a dozen or so times. "Mar-
riage was doomed. Came back from Vietnam with too much anger
and resentment. Had PTSD. I had what they call post-traumatic
stress disorder. That's what they told me. When I come back, I did-
n't want to know anybody. I come back, I couldn't relate to any-
thing that was going on around here, as far as civilized living. It's
like I was there so long, it was totally insane. Wearing clean clothes,
and people saying hello, and people smiling, and people going to

THE   HUMAN  STAIN

parties, and people driving cars—I couldn't relate to it anymore. I
didn't know how to talk to anybody, I didn't know how to say hello
to anybody. I withdrew for a long time. I used to get in my car, drive
around, go in the woods, walk in the woods—it was the weirdest
thing. I withdrew from myself. I had no idea what I was going
through. My buddies would call me, I wouldn't call back. They
were afraid I was going to die in a car accident, they were afraid
I was—"

I interrupted. "Why were they afraid you were going to die in a

car accident?"

"I was drinking. I was driving around and drinking."
"Did you ever get into a car accident?"
He smiled. Didn't take a pause and stare me down. Didn't give

me an especially threatening look. Didn't jump up and go for my
throat. Just smiled a little, more good nature in the smile than I
could have believed he had in him to show. In a deliberately light-
hearted way, he shrugged and said, "Got me. I didn't know what I
was going through, you know? Accident? In an accident? I wouldn't
know if I did. I suppose I didn't. You're going through what they
call post-traumatic stress disorder. Stuff keeps coming back into
your subconscious mind that you're back in Vietnam, that you're
back in the army again. I'm not an educated guy. I didn't even know
that. People were so pissed at me for this and that, and they didn't
even know what I was going through and I didn't even know—you
know? I don't have educated friends who know these things. I got
assholes for friends. Oh, man, I mean real guaranteed hundred per-
cent assholes or double your money back." Again the shrug. Comi-
cal? Intended to be comical? No, more a happy-go-lucky strain of
sinisterness. "So what can I do?" he asked helplessly.

Conning me. Playing with me. Because he knows I know. Here

we are alone up where we are, and I know, and he knows I know.
And the auger knows. All ye know and all ye need to know, all in-
scribed in the spiral of its curving steel blade.

"How'd you find out you had PTSD?"
"A colored girl at the VA. Excuse me. An African American. A

THE  PURIFYING RITUAL

very intelligent African American. She's got a master's degree. You
got a master's degree?"

"No," I said.
"Well, she's got one, and that's how I found out what I had. Oth-

erwise I still wouldn't know. That's how I started learning about
myself, what I was going through. They told me. And not just me.
Don't think it was just me. Thousands and thousands of guys were
going through what I was going through. Thousands and thou-
sands of guys waking up in the middle of the night back in Viet-
nam. Thousands and thousands of guys people are calling up and
they don't call them back. Thousands and thousands of guys hav-
ing these real bad dreams. And so I told that to this African Ameri-
can and she understood what it was. Because she had that master's
degree, she told me how it was going through my subconscious
mind, and that it was the same with thousands and thousands
of other guys. The subconscious mind. You can't control it. It's like
the government. It is the government. It's the government all over
again. It gets you to do what you don't want to do. Thousands and
thousands of guys getting married and it's doomed, because they
have this anger and this resentment about Vietnam in their sub-
conscious mind. She explained all this to me. They just popped me
from Vietnam onto a C-41 air force jet to the Philippines, then on a
World Airways jet to Travis Air Force Base, then they gave me two
hundred dollars to go home. So it took me, like, from the time I left
Vietnam to go home, it took about three days. You're back in civili-
zation. And you're doomed. And your wife, even if it's ten years
later, she's doomed. She's doomed, and what the hell did she do?
Nothin'."

"Still have the PTSD?"
"Well, I still tend to isolate, don't I? What do you think I'm doin'

out here?"

"But no more drinking and driving," I heard myself saying. "No

more accidents."

"There were never accidents. Don't you listen? I already told you

that. Not that I know of."

THE  HUMAN  STAIN

"And the marriage was doomed."
"Oh yeah. My fault. Hundred percent. She was a lovely woman.

Entirely blameless. All me. Always all me. She deserved a helluva lot
better than me."

"What happened to her?" I asked.
He shook his head. A sad shrug, a sigh—complete bullshit, delib-

erately transparent bullshit. "No idea. Ran away, I scared her so.
Scared the woman shitless. My heart goes out to her, wherever she
may be. Completely blameless person."

"No kids."
"Nope. No kids. You?" he asked me.
"No."
"Married?"
"No more," I said.
"So, you and me in the same boat. Free as the wind. What kind of

books do you write? Whodunits?"

"I wouldn't say that."
"True stories?"
"Sometimes."
"What? Romance?" he asked, smiling. "Not pornography, I

hope." He pretended that that was an unwanted idea it vexed him
even to entertain. "I sure hope our local author is not up there in
Mike Dumouchel's place writing and publishing pornography."

"I write about people like you," I said.
"Is that right?"
"Yes. People like you. Their problems."
"What's the name of one of your books?"
"The Human Stain"
"Yeah? Can I get it?"
"It's not out yet. It's not finished yet."
"I'll buy it."
"I'll send you one. What's your name?"
"Les Farley. Yeah, send it. When you finish it, send it care of the
town garage. Town Garage. Route 6. Les Farley." Needling me
again, sort of needling everyone—himself, his friends, "our local

author"—he said, even as he began laughing at the idea, "Me and
the guys'll read it." He didn't so much laugh aloud as nibble at the
bait of an out-loud laugh, work up to and around the laugh with-
out quite sinking his teeth in. Close to the hook of dangerous mer-
riment, but not close enough to swallow it.

"I hope you will," I said.
I couldn't just turn and go then. Not on that note, not with him

shedding ever so slightly a bit more of the emotional incognito,
not with the possibility raised of peering a little further into his
mind. "What were you like before you went into the service?" I
asked him.

"Is this for your book?"
"Yes. Yes." I laughed out loud. Without even intending to, with a

ridiculous, robust burst of defiance, I said, foolishly, "It's all for my
book."

And he now laughed with more abandon too. On this loony bin

of a lake.

"Were you a gregarious guy, Les?"
"Yeah," he said. "I was."
"With people?"
"Yeah."
"Like to have a good time with them?"
"Yeah. Tons of friends. Fast cars. You know, all that stuff. I

worked all the time. But when I wasn't working, yeah."

"And all you Vietnam veterans ice fish?"
"I don't know." The nibbling laughter once again. I thought, It's

easier for him to kill somebody than to cut loose with real amuse-
ment.

"I started ice fishing," he told me, "not that long ago. After my

wife ran away. I rented a little shack, back in the woods, on Dragon-
fly. Back in the woods, right on the water, Dragonfly Pond, and I al-
ways summer fished, all my life, but I was never too interested in ice
fishing. I always figure it's too cold out there, you know? So the first
winter I lived on the pond, and I wasn't myself that winter—god-
damn PTSD—I was watching this ice fisherman walk out there and

go out fishing. So I watched this a couple of times, so one day I put
on my clothes and took a walk out there and this guy was catching a
lot of fish, yellow perch and trout and everything. So I figure, this
fishin' is just as good as the summertime, if not better. All you have
to do is get the right amount of clothing on and get the right equip-
ment. So I did. I went down and bought an auger, a nice auger"—
he points—"jiggin' rod, lures. Hundreds of different kinds of lures
you can get. Hundreds of different manufacturers and makes. All
various sizes. You drill a hole through the ice, and you drop your fa-
vorite lure down there with the bait on it—it's just a hand move-
ment, you just make that jig move up and down, you know. Because
it's dark down underneath the ice. Oh, it is dark all right," he told
me, and, for the first time in the conversation, he looked at me with
not too much but too little opacity in his face, too little deceit, too
little duplicity. In his voice there was a chilling resonance when
he said, "It's real dark." A chilling and astonishing resonance that
made everything about Coleman's accident clear. "So any kind of a
flash down there," he added, "the fish are attracted to it. I guess
they're adaptable to that dark environment."

No, he's not stupid. He's a brute and he's a killer but not so dumb

as I thought. It isn't a brain that is missing. Beneath whatever the
disguise, it rarely is.

"Because they have to eat," he's explaining to me, scientifically.

"They find food down there. And their bodies are able to adapt to
that extracold water and their eyes adapt to the dark. They're sensi-
tive to movement. If they see any kind of flashes or they maybe feel
the vibrations of your lure moving, they're attracted to it. They
know that it's something alive and it might be edible. But if you
don't jig it, you'll never get a hit. If I had a son, you see, which is
what I was thinkin', I'd be teachin' him how to jig it. I'd be teachin'
him how to bait the lure. There's different kinds of baits, you see,
most of them are fly larvae or bee larvae that they raise for ice
fishin'. And we'd go down to the store, me and Les Junior, and we'd
buy 'em at the ice fishin' store. And they come in a little cup, you
know. If I had Little Les right now, a son of my own, you know, if I

wasn't doomed instead for life with this freakin' PTSD, I'd be out
here with him teachin' him all this stuff. I'd teach him how to use
the auger." He pointed to the tool, still just out of reach behind him
on the ice. "I use a five-inch auger. They come from four inches up
to eight inches. I prefer a five-inch hole. It's perfect. I never had a
problem yet gettin' a fish through a five-inch hole. Six is a little too
big. The reason six is too big, the blades are another inch wider,
which doesn't seem like much, but if you look at the five-inch au-
ger—here, let me show you." He got up and went over and he got
the auger. Despite the padded coveralls and the boots that added to
his bulk as a shortish, stocky man, he moved deftly across the ice,
sweeping up the auger in one hand the way you might sweep the
bat up off the field while jogging back to the bench after running
out a fly ball. He came up to me and raised the auger's long bright
bit right up to my face. "Here."

Here. Here was the origin. Here was the essence. Here.
"If you look at the five-inch auger compared to the six-inch

auger," he said, "it's a big difference. When you're hand drilling
through a foot to eighteen inches of ice, it takes a lot more effort to
use a six-inch than a five-inch. With this here I can drill through a
foot and a half of ice in about twenty seconds. If the blades are
good and sharp. The sharpness is everything. You always gotta keep
your blades sharp."

I nodded. "It's cold out here on the ice."
"You better believe it."
"Didn't notice till now. I'm getting cold. My face. It's getting to

me. I should be going." And I took my first step backward and away
from the thin slush surrounding him and the hole he was fishing.

"Good enough. And you know your ice fishing now, don't you?

Maybe you want to write a book about that instead of a whodunit."

Shuffling backward a half-step at a time, I'd retreated toward the

shore some four or five feet, but he was still holding the auger up in
his one hand, the corkscrew blade raised still to the level where my
eyes had been before. Completely bested, I'd begun backing away.
"And now you know my secret spot. That too. You know every-

THE   HUMAN   STAIN

thing," he said. "But you won't tell nobody, will you? It's nice to
have a secret spot. You don't tell anybody about 'em. You learn not
to say anything."

"It's safe with me," I said.
"There's a brook that comes in down off the mountain, it flows

over ledges. Did I tell you that?" he said. "I never traced its source.
It's a constant flow of water that comes down into the lake here
from there. And there's a spillway on the south side of the lake,
which is where the water flows out." He pointed, still with that au-
ger. He was holding it tight in the fingertipless glove of one big
hand. "And then there's numerous springs underneath the lake.
The water comes up from underneath, so the water constantly
turns over. It cleans itself. And fish have to have clean water to sur-
vive and get big and healthy. And this place has all of those ingredi-
ents. And they're all God-made. Nothing man had to do with it.
That's why it's clean and that's why I come here. If man has to do
with it, stay away from it. That's my motto. The motto of a guy with
a subconscious mind full of PTSD. Away from man, close to God.
So don't you forget to keep this my secret place. The only time a se-
cret gets out, Mr. Zuckerman, is when you tell that secret."

"I hear ya."
"And, hey, Mr. Zuckerman—the book."
"What book?"
"Your book. Send the book."
"You got it," I said, "it's in the mail," and started back across the

ice. He was behind me, still holding that auger as slowly I started
away. It was a long way. If I even made it, I knew that my five years
alone in my house here were over. I knew that if and when I
finished the book, I was going to have to go elsewhere to live.

I turned from the shore, once I was safely there, to look back and

see if he was going to follow me into the woods after all and to do
me in before I ever got my chance to enter Coleman Silk's boyhood
house and, like Steena Palsson before me, to sit with his East Or-
ange family as the white guest at Sunday dinner. Just facing him, I
could feel the terror of the auger—even with him already seated

THE  PURIFYING  RITUAL

back on his bucket: the icy white of the lake encircling a tiny spot
that was a man, the only human marker in all of nature, like the X
of an illiterate's signature on a sheet of paper. There it was, if not
the whole story, the whole picture. Only rarely, at the end of our
century, does life offer up a vision as pure and peaceful as this one:
a solitary man on a bucket, fishing through eighteen inches of ice in
a lake that's constantly turning over its water atop an arcadian
mountain in America. 

