Rudyard Kipling

Section 1

The Man Who Would Be King

(1888)

“Brother to a Prince and fellow to a beggar if he be found worthy.”

The Law, as quoted, lays down a fair conduct of life, and one not easy to follow. I have
been fellow to a beggar again and again under circumstances which prevented either of us
finding out whether the other was worthy. I have still to be brother to a Prince, though I
once came near to kinship with what might have been a veritable King and was promised
the reversion of a Kingdom — army, law-courts, revenue and policy all complete. But,
to-day, I greatly fear that my King is dead, and if I want a crown I must go and hunt it for
myself.

The beginning of everything was in a railway train upon the road to Mhow from Ajmir.
There had been a deficit in the Budget, which necessitated travelling, not Second-class,
which is only half as dear as First-class, but by Intermediate, which is very awful indeed.
There are no cushions in the Intermediate class, and the population are either
Intermediate, which is Eurasian, or native, which for a long night journey is nasty; or
Loafer, which is amusing though intoxicated. Intermediates do not patronize
refreshment-rooms. They carry their food in bundles and pots, and buy sweets from the
native sweetmeat-sellers, and drink the roadside water. That is why in the hot weather
Intermediates are taken out of the carriages dead, and in all weathers are most properly
looked down upon.

My particular Intermediate happened to be empty till I reached Nasirabad, when a huge
gentleman in shirt-sleeves entered, and, following the custom of Intermediates, passed the
time of day. He was a wanderer and a vagabond like myself, but with an educated taste
for whiskey. He told tales of things he had seen and done, of out-of-the-way corners of
the Empire into which he had penetrated, and of adventures in which he risked his life for
a few days’ food. “If India was filled with men like you and me, not knowing more than
the crows where they’d get their next day’s rations, it isn’t seventy millions of revenue the

land would be paying — it’s seven hundred million,” said he; and as I looked at his
mouth and chin I was disposed to agree with him. We talked politics — the politics of
Loaferdom that sees things from the underside where the lath and plaster is not smoothed
off — and we talked postal arrangements because my friend wanted to send a telegram
back from the next station to Ajmir, which is the turning-off place from the Bombay to
the Mhow line as you travel westward. My friend had no money beyond eight annas
which he wanted for dinner, and I had no money at all, owing to the hitch in the Budget
before mentioned. Further, I was going into a wilderness where, though I should resume
touch with the Treasury, there were no telegraph offices. I was, therefore, unable to help
him in any way.

“We might threaten a Station-master, and make him send a wire on tick,” said my friend,
“but that’d mean inquiries for you and for me, and I’ve got my hands full these days. Did
you say you are travelling back along this line within any days?”

“Within ten,” I said.

“Can’t you make it eight?” said he. “Mine is rather urgent business.”

“I can send your telegram within ten days if that will serve you,” I said.

“I couldn’t trust the wire to fetch him now I think of it. It’s this way. He leaves Delhi on
the 23d for Bombay. That means he’ll be running through Ajmir about the night of the
23d.”

“But I’m going into the Indian Desert,” I explained.

“Well and good,” said he. “You’ll be changing at Marwar Junction to get into Jodhpore
territory — you must do that — and he’ll be coming through Marwar Junction in the early
morning of the 24th by the Bombay Mail. Can you be at Marwar Junction on that time?
’Twon’t be inconveniencing you because I know that there’s precious few pickings to be
got out of these Central India States — even though you pretend to be correspondent of
the Backwoodsman.”

“Have you ever tried that trick?” I asked.

“Again and again, but the Residents find you out, and then you get escorted to the Border
before you’ve time to get your knife into them. But about my friend here. I must give him
a word o’ mouth to tell him what’s come to me or else he won’t know where to go. I
would take it more than kind of you if you was to come out of Central India in time to

catch him at Marwar Junction, and say to him:— ‘He has gone South for the week.’ He’ll
know what that means. He’s a big man with a red beard, and a great swell he is. You’ll
find him sleeping like a gentleman with all his luggage round him in a second-class
compartment. But don’t you be afraid. Slip down the window, and say:— ‘He has gone
South for the week,’ and he’ll tumble. It’s only cutting your time of stay in those parts by
two days. I ask you as a stranger — going to the West,” he said with emphasis.

“Where have you come from?” said I.

“From the East,” said he, “and I am hoping that you will give him the message on the
Square — for the sake of my Mother as well as your own.”

Englishmen are not usually softened by appeals to the memory of their mothers, but for
certain reasons, which will be fully apparent, I saw fit to agree.

“It’s more than a little matter,” said he, “and that’s why I ask you to do it — and now I
know that I can depend on you doing it. A second-class carriage at Marwar Junction, and
a red-haired man asleep in it. You’ll be sure to remember. I get out at the next station, and
I must hold on there till he comes or sends me what I want.”

“I’ll give the message if I catch him,” I said, “and for the sake of your Mother as well as
mine I’ll give you a word of advice. Don’t try to run the Central India States just now as
the correspondent of the Backwoodsman. There’s a real one knocking about here, and it
might lead to trouble.”

“Thank you,” said he simply, “and when will the swine be gone? I can’t starve because
he’s ruining my work. I wanted to get hold of the Degumber Rajah down here about his
father’s widow, and give him a jump.”

“What did he do to his father’s widow, then?”

“Filled her up with red pepper and slippered her to death as she hung from a beam. I
found that out myself and I’m the only man that would dare going into the State to get
hush-money for it. They’ll try to poison me, same as they did in Chortumna when I went
on the loot there. But you’ll give the man at Marwar Junction my message?”

He got out at a little roadside station, and I reflected. I had heard, more than once, of men
personating correspondents of newspapers and bleeding small Native States with threats
of exposure, but I had never met any of the caste before. They lead a hard life, and
generally die with great suddenness. The Native States have a wholesome horror of

English newspapers, which may throw light on their peculiar methods of government, and
do their best to choke correspondents with champagne, or drive them out of their mind
with four-in-hand barouches. They do not understand that nobody cares a straw for the
internal administration of Native States so long as oppression and crime are kept within
decent limits, and the ruler is not drugged, drunk, or diseased from one end of the year to
the other. Native States were created by Providence in order to supply picturesque
scenery, tigers and tall-writing. They are the dark places of the earth, full of unimaginable
cruelty, touching the Railway and the Telegraph on one side, and, on the other, the days
of Harun-al-Raschid. When I left the train I did business with divers Kings, and in eight
days passed through many changes of life. Sometimes I wore dress-clothes and consorted
with Princes and Politicals, drinking from crystal and eating from silver. Sometimes I lay
out upon the ground and devoured what I could get, from a plate made of a flapjack, and
drank the running water, and slept under the same rug as my servant. It was all in a day’s
work.

Then I headed for the Great Indian Desert upon the proper date, as I had promised, and
the night Mail set me down at Marwar Junction, where a funny little, happy-go-lucky,
native managed railway runs to Jodhpore. The Bombay Mail from Delhi makes a short
halt at Marwar. She arrived as I got in, and I had just time to hurry to her platform and go
down the carriages. There was only one second-class on the train. I slipped the window
and looked down upon a flaming red beard, half covered by a railway rug. That was my
man, fast asleep, and I dug him gently in the ribs. He woke with a grunt and I saw his face
in the light of the lamps. It was a great and shining face.

“Tickets again?” said he.

“No,” said I. “I am to tell you that he is gone South for the week. He is gone South for the
week!”

The train had begun to move out. The red man rubbed his eyes. “He has gone South for
the week,” he repeated. “Now that’s just like his impudence. Did he say that I was to give
you anything? — ’Cause I won’t.”

“He didn’t,” I said and dropped away, and watched the red lights die out in the dark. It
was horribly cold because the wind was blowing off the sands. I climbed into my own
train — not an Intermediate Carriage this time — and went to sleep.

If the man with the beard had given me a rupee I should have kept it as a memento of a
rather curious affair. But the consciousness of having done my duty was my only reward.

Later on I reflected that two gentlemen like my friends could not do any good if they
foregathered and personated correspondents of newspapers, and might, if they “stuck up”
one of the little rat-trap states of Central India or Southern Rajputana, get themselves into
serious difficulties. I therefore took some trouble to describe them as accurately as I could
remember to people who would be interested in deporting them; and succeeded, so I was
later informed, in having them headed back from the Degumber borders.

Then I became respectable, and returned to an Office where there were no Kings and no
incidents except the daily manufacture of a newspaper. A newspaper office seems to
attract every conceivable sort of person, to the prejudice of discipline. Zenana-mission
ladies arrive, and beg that the Editor will instantly abandon all his duties to describe a
Christian prize-giving in a back-slum of a perfectly inaccessible village; Colonels who
have been overpassed for commands sit down and sketch the outline of a series of ten,
twelve, or twenty-four leading articles on Seniority versus Selection; missionaries wish to
know why they have not been permitted to escape from their regular vehicles of abuse
and swear at a brother-missionary under special patronage of the editorial We; stranded
theatrical companies troop up to explain that they cannot pay for their advertisements, but
on their return from New Zealand or Tahiti will do so with interest; inventors of patent
punkah-pulling machines, carriage couplings and unbreakable swords and axle-trees call
with specifications in their pockets and hours at their disposal; tea-companies enter and
elaborate their prospectuses with the office pens; secretaries of ball-committees clamor to
have the glories of their last dance more fully expounded; strange ladies rustle in and
say:— “I want a hundred lady’s cards printed at once, please,” which is manifestly part of
an Editor’s duty; and every dissolute ruffian that ever tramped the Grand Trunk Road
makes it his business to ask for employment as a proof-reader. And, all the time, the
telephone-bell is ringing madly, and Kings are being killed on the Continent, and Empires
are saying, “You’re another,” and Mister Gladstone is calling down brimstone upon the
British Dominions, and the little black copy-boys are whining, “kaa-pi chayha-yeh” (copy
wanted) like tired bees, and most of the paper is as blank as Modred’s shield.

But that is the amusing part of the year. There are other six months wherein none ever
come to call, and the thermometer walks inch by inch up to the top of the glass, and the
office is darkened to just above reading light, and the press machines are red-hot of touch,
and nobody writes anything but accounts of amusements in the Hill-stations or obituary
notices. Then the telephone becomes a tinkling terror, because it tells you of the sudden
deaths of men and women that you knew intimately, and the prickly-heat covers you as
with a garment, and you sit down and write:— “A slight increase of sickness is reported
from the Khuda Janta Khan District. The outbreak is purely sporadic in its nature, and,
thanks to the energetic efforts of the District authorities, is now almost at an end. It is,
however, with deep regret we record the death, etc.”

Then the sickness really breaks out, and the less recording and reporting the better for the
peace of the subscribers. But the Empires and the Kings continue to divert themselves as
selfishly as before, and the foreman thinks that a daily paper really ought to come out
once in twenty-four hours, and all the people at the Hill-stations in the middle of their
amusements say:— “Good gracious! Why can’t the paper be sparkling? I’m sure there’s
plenty going on up here.”

That is the dark half of the moon, and, as the advertisements say, “must be experienced to
be appreciated.”

It was in that season, and a remarkably evil season, that the paper began running the last
issue of the week on Saturday night, which is to say Sunday morning, after the custom of
a London paper. This was a great convenience, for immediately after the paper was put to
bed, the dawn would lower the thermometer from 96° to almost 84° for almost half an
hour, and in that chill — you have no idea how cold is 84° on the grass until you begin to
pray for it — a very tired man could set off to sleep ere the heat roused him.

One Saturday night it was my pleasant duty to put the paper to bed alone. A King or
courtier or a courtesan or a community was going to die or get a new Constitution, or do
something that was important on the other side of the world, and the paper was to be held
open till the latest possible minute in order to catch the telegram. It was a pitchy black
night, as stifling as a June night can be, and the loo, the red-hot wind from the westward,
was booming among the tinder-dry trees and pretending that the rain was on its heels.
Now and again a spot of almost boiling water would fall on the dust with the flop of a
frog, but all our weary world knew that was only pretence. It was a shade cooler in the
press-room than the office, so I sat there, while the type ticked and clicked, and the
night-jars hooted at the windows, and the all but naked compositors wiped the sweat from
their foreheads and called for water. The thing that was keeping us back, whatever it was,
would not come off, though the loo dropped and the last type was set, and the whole
round earth stood still in the choking heat, with its finger on its lip, to wait the event. I
drowsed, and wondered whether the telegraph was a blessing, and whether this dying
man, or struggling people, was aware of the inconvenience the delay was causing. There
was no special reason beyond the heat and worry to make tension, but, as the clock-hands
crept up to three o’clock and the machines spun their fly-wheels two and three times to
see that all was in order, before I said the word that would set them off, I could have
shrieked aloud.

Then the roar and rattle of the wheels shivered the quiet into little bits. I rose to go away,
but two men in white clothes stood in front of me. The first one said:— “It’s him!” The
second said — “So it is!” And they both laughed almost as loudly as the machinery

roared, and mopped their foreheads. “We see there was a light burning across the road
and we were sleeping in that ditch there for coolness, and I said to my friend here, the
office is open. Let’s come along and speak to him as turned us back from the Degumber
State,” said the smaller of the two. He was the man I had met in the Mhow train, and his
fellow was the red-bearded man of Marwar Junction. There was no mistaking the
eyebrows of the one or the beard of the other.

I was not pleased, because I wished to go to sleep, not to squabble with loafers. “What do
you want?” I asked.

“Half an hour’s talk with you cool and comfortable, in the office,” said the red-bearded
man. “We’d like some drink — the Contrack doesn’t begin yet, Peachey, so you needn’t
look — but what we really want is advice. We don’t want money. We ask you as a favor,
because you did us a bad turn about Degumber.”

I led from the press-room to the stifling office with the maps on the walls, and the
red-haired man rubbed his hands. “That’s something like,” said he. “This was the proper
shop to come to. Now, Sir, let me introduce to you Brother Peachey Carnehan, that’s him,
and Brother Daniel Dravot, that is me, and the less said about our professions the better,
for we have been most things in our time. Soldier, sailor, compositor, photographer,
proof-reader, street-preacher, and correspondents of the Backwoodsman when we thought
the paper wanted one. Carnehan is sober, and so am I. Look at us first and see that’s sure.
It will save you cutting into my talk. We’ll take one of your cigars apiece, and you shall
see us light.” I watched the test. The men were absolutely sober, so I gave them each a
tepid peg.

“Well and good,” said Carnehan of the eyebrows, wiping the froth from his mustache.
“Let me talk now, Dan. We have been all over India, mostly on foot. We have been
boiler-fitters, engine-drivers, petty contractors, and all that, and we have decided that
India isn’t big enough for such as us.”

They certainly were too big for the office. Dravot’s beard seemed to fill half the room and
Carnehan’s shoulders the other half, as they sat on the big table. Carnehan continued: —
“The country isn’t half worked out because they that governs it won’t let you touch it.
They spend all their blessed time in governing it, and you can’t lift a spade, nor chip a
rock, nor look for oil, nor anything like that without all the Government saying — ‘Leave
it alone and let us govern.’ Therefore, such as it is, we will let it alone, and go away to
some other place where a man isn’t crowded and can come to his own. We are not little
men, and there is nothing that we are afraid of except Drink, and we have signed a
Contrack on that. Therefore, we are going away to be Kings.”

“Kings in our own right,” muttered Dravot.

“Yes, of course,” I said. “You’ve been tramping in the sun, and it’s a very warm night,
and hadn’t you better sleep over the notion? Come to-morrow.”

“Neither drunk nor sunstruck,” said Dravot. “We have slept over the notion half a year,
and require to see Books and Atlases, and we have decided that there is only one place
now in the world that two strong men can Sar-a-whack. They call it Kafiristan. By my
reckoning its the top right-hand corner of Afghanistan, not more than three hundred miles
from Peshawar. They have two and thirty heathen idols there, and we’ll be the thirty-third.
It’s a mountainous country, and the women of those parts are very beautiful.”

“But that is provided against in the Contrack,” said Carnehan. “Neither Women nor
Liquor, Daniel.”

“And that’s all we know, except that no one has gone there, and they fight, and in any
place where they fight a man who knows how to drill men can always be a King. We shall
go to those parts and say to any King we find — ‘D’ you want to vanquish your foes?’
and we will show him how to drill men; for that we know better than anything else. Then
we will subvert that King and seize his Throne and establish a Dy-nasty.”

“You’ll be cut to pieces before you’re fifty miles across the Border,” I said. “You have to
travel through Afghanistan to get to that country. It’s one mass of mountains and peaks
and glaciers, and no Englishman has been through it. The people are utter brutes, and
even if you reached them you couldn’t do anything.”

“That’s more like,” said Carnehan. “If you could think us a little more mad we would be
more pleased. We have come to you to know about this country, to read a book about it,
and to be shown maps. We want you to tell us that we are fools and to show us your
books.” He turned to the book-cases.

“Are you at all in earnest?” I said.

“A little,” said Dravot, sweetly. “As big a map as you have got, even if it’s all blank
where Kafiristan is, and any books you’ve got. We can read, though we aren’t very
educated.”

I uncased the big thirty-two-miles-to-the-inch map of India, and two smaller Frontier
maps, hauled down volume INF-KAN of the Encyclopædia Britannica, and the men
consulted them.

“See here!” said Dravot, his thumb on the map. “Up to Jagdallak, Peachey and me know
the road. We was there with Roberts’s Army. We’ll have to turn off to the right at
Jagdallak through Laghmann territory. Then we get among the hills — fourteen thousand
feet — fifteen thousand — it will be cold work there, but it don’t look very far on the
map.”

I handed him Wood on the Sources of the Oxus. Carnehan was deep in the Encyclopædia.

“They’re a mixed lot,” said Dravot, reflectively; “and it won’t help us to know the names
of their tribes. The more tribes the more they’ll fight, and the better for us. From
Jagdallak to Ashang. H’mm!”

“But all the information about the country is as sketchy and inaccurate as can be,” I
protested. “No one knows anything about it really. Here’s the file of the United Services’
Institute. Read what Bellew says.”

“Blow Bellew!” said Carnehan. “Dan, they’re an all-fired lot of heathens, but this book
here says they think they’re related to us English.”

I smoked while the men pored over Raverty, Wood, the maps and the Encyclopædia.

“There is no use your waiting,” said Dravot, politely. “It’s about four o’clock now. We’ll
go before six o’clock if you want to sleep, and we won’t steal any of the papers. Don’t
you sit up. We’re two harmless lunatics, and if you come, to-morrow evening, down to
the Serai we’ll say good-by to you.”

“You are two fools,” I answered. “You’ll be turned back at the Frontier or cut up the
minute you set foot in Afghanistan. Do you want any money or a recommendation
down-country? I can help you to the chance of work next week.”

“Next week we shall be hard at work ourselves, thank you,” said Dravot. “It isn’t so easy
being a King as it looks. When we’ve got our Kingdom in going order we’ll let you know,
and you can come up and help us to govern it.”

“Would two lunatics make a Contrack like that!” said Carnehan, with subdued pride,
showing me a greasy half-sheet of note-paper on which was written the following. I
copied it, then and there, as a curiosity:—

This Contract between me and you persuing witnesseth in the name of God — Amen and
so forth.

(One) That me and you will settle this matter together: i.e., to be Kings of Kafiristan.

(Two) That you and me will not while this matter is being settled, look at any Liquor, nor
any Woman black, white or brown, so as to get mixed up with one or the other harmful.

(Three) That we conduct ourselves with Dignity and Discretion, and if one of us gets into
trouble the other will stay by him.

Signed by you and me this day.
Peachey Taliaferro Carnehan.
Daniel Dravot.
Both Gentlemen at Large.

“There was no need for the last article,” said Carnehan, blushing modestly; “but it looks
regular. Now you know the sort of men that loafers are — we are loafers, Dan, until we
get out of India — and do you think that we could sign a Contrack like that unless we was
in earnest? We have kept away from the two things that make life worth having.”

“You won’t enjoy your lives much longer if you are going to try this idiotic adventure.
Don’t set the office on fire,” I said, “and go away before nine o’clock.”

I left them still poring over the maps and making notes on the back of the “Contrack.”
“Be sure to come down to the Serai to-morrow,” were their parting words.

The Kumharsen Serai is the great four-square sink of humanity where the strings of
camels and horses from the North load and unload. All the nationalities of Central Asia
may be found there, and most of the folk of India proper. Balkh and Bokhara there meet
Bengal and Bombay, and try to draw eye-teeth. You can buy ponies, turquoises, Persian
pussy-cats, saddle-bags, fat-tailed sheep and musk in the Kumharsen Serai, and get many
strange things for nothing. In the afternoon I went down there to see whether my friends
intended to keep their word or were lying about drunk.

A priest attired in fragments of ribbons and rags stalked up to me, gravely twisting a
child’s paper whirligig. Behind him was his servant, bending under the load of a crate of
mud toys. The two were loading up two camels, and the inhabitants of the Serai watched
them with shrieks of laughter.

“The priest is mad,” said a horse-dealer to me. “He is going up to Kabul to sell toys to the
Amir. He will either be raised to honor or have his head cut off. He came in here this
morning and has been behaving madly ever since.”

“The witless are under the protection of God,” stammered a flat-cheeked Usbeg in broken
Hindi. “They foretell future events.”

“Would they could have foretold that my caravan would have been cut up by the
Shinwaris almost within shadow of the Pass!” grunted the Eusufzai agent of a Rajputana
trading-house whose goods had been feloniously diverted into the hands of other robbers
just across the Border, and whose misfortunes were the laughing-stock of the bazar.
“Ohé, priest, whence come you and whither do you go?”

“From Roum have I come,” shouted the priest, waving his whirligig; “from Roum, blown
by the breath of a hundred devils across the sea! O thieves, robbers, liars, the blessing of
Pir Khan on pigs, dogs, and perjurers! Who will take the Protected of God to the North to
sell charms that are never still to the Amir? The camels shall not gall, the sons shall not
fall sick, and the wives shall remain faithful while they are away, of the men who give me
place in their caravan. Who will assist me to slipper the King of the Roos with a golden
slipper with a silver heel? The protection of Pir Kahn be upon his labors!” He spread out
the skirts of his gaberdine and pirouetted between the lines of tethered horses.

“There starts a caravan from Peshawar to Kabul in twenty days, Huzrut,” said the
Eusufzai trader. “My camels go therewith. Do thou also go and bring us good luck.”

“I will go even now!” shouted the priest. “I will depart upon my winged camels, and be at
Peshawar in a day! Ho! Hazar Mir Khan,” he yelled to his servant “drive out the camels,
but let me first mount my own.”

He leaped on the back of his beast as it knelt, and turning round to me, cried:—

“Come thou also, Sahib, a little along the road, and I will sell thee a charm — an amulet
that shall make thee King of Kafiristan.”

Then the light broke upon me, and I followed the two camels out of the Serai till we
reached open road and the priest halted.

“What d’ you think o’ that?” said he in English. “Carnehan can’t talk their patter, so I’ve
made him my servant. He makes a handsome servant. ’Tisn’t for nothing that I’ve been
knocking about the country for fourteen years. Didn’t I do that talk neat? We’ll hitch on
to a caravan at Peshawar till we get to Jagdallak, and then we’ll see if we can get donkeys
for our camels, and strike into Kafiristan. Whirligigs for the Amir, O Lor! Put your hand
under the camel-bags and tell me what you feel.”

I felt the butt of a Martini, and another and another.

“Twenty of ’em,” said Dravot, placidly.

“Twenty of ’em, and ammunition to correspond, under the whirligigs and the mud dolls.”

“Heaven help you if you are caught with those things!” I said. “A Martini is worth her
weight in silver among the Pathans.”

“Fifteen hundred rupees of capital — every rupee we could beg, borrow, or steal — are
invested on these two camels,” said Dravot. “We won’t get caught. We’re going through
the Khaiber with a regular caravan. Who’d touch a poor mad priest?”

“Have you got everything you want?” I asked, overcome with astonishment.

“Not yet, but we shall soon. Give us a momento of your kindness, Brother. You did me a
service yesterday, and that time in Marwar. Half my Kingdom shall you have, as the
saying is.” I slipped a small charm compass from my watch-chain and handed it up to the
priest.

“Good-by,” said Dravot, giving me his hand cautiously. “It’s the last time we’ll shake
hands with an Englishman these many days. Shake hands with him, Carnehan,” he cried,
as the second camel passed me.

Carnehan leaned down and shook hands. Then the camels passed away along the dusty
road, and I was left alone to wonder. My eye could detect no failure in the disguises. The
scene in the Serai attested that they were complete to the native mind. There was just the
chance, therefore, that Carnehan and Dravot would be able to wander through
Afghanistan without detection. But, beyond, they would find death, certain and awful
death.

Ten days later a native friend of mine, giving me the news of the day from Peshawar,
wound up his letter with:— “There has been much laughter here on account of a certain
mad priest who is going in his estimation to sell petty gauds and insignificant trinkets
which he ascribes as great charms to H. H. the Amir of Bokhara. He passed through
Peshawar and associated himself to the Second Summer caravan that goes to Kabul. The
merchants are pleased because through superstition they imagine that such mad fellows
bring good-fortune.”

The two then, were beyond the Border. I would have prayed for them, but, that night, a

real King died in Europe, and demanded an obituary notice.

The wheel of the world swings through the same phases again and again. Summer passed
and winter thereafter, and came and passed again. The daily paper continued and I with it,
and upon the third summer there fell a hot night, a night-issue, and a strained waiting for
something to be telegraphed from the other side of the world, exactly as had happened
before. A few great men had died in the past two years, the machines worked with more
clatter, and some of the trees in the Office garden were a few feet taller. But that was all
the difference.

I passed over to the press-room, and went through just such a scene as I have already
described. The nervous tension was stronger than it had been two years before, and I felt
the heat more acutely. At three o’clock I cried, “Print off,” and turned to go, when there
crept to my chair what was left of a man. He was bent into a circle, his head was sunk
between his shoulders, and he moved his feet one over the other like a bear. I could hardly
see whether he walked or crawled — this rag-wrapped, whining cripple who addressed
me by name, crying that he was come back. “Can you give me a drink?” he whimpered.
“For the Lord’s sake, give me a drink!”

I went back to the office, the man following with groans of pain, and I turned up the
lamp.

“Don’t you know me?” he gasped, dropping into a chair, and he turned his drawn face,
surmounted by a shock of gray hair, to the light.

I looked at him intently. Once before had I seen eyebrows that met over the nose in an
inch-broad black band, but for the life of me I could not tell where.

“I don’t know you,” I said, handing him the whiskey. “What can I do for you?”

He took a gulp of the spirit raw, and shivered in spite of the suffocating heat.

“I’ve come back,” he repeated; “and I was the King of Kafiristan — me and Dravot —
crowned Kings we was! In this office we settled it — you setting there and giving us the
books. I am Peachey — Peachey Taliaferro Carnehan, and you’ve been setting here ever
since — O Lord!”

I was more than a little astonished, and expressed my feelings accordingly.

“It’s true,” said Carnehan, with a dry cackle, nursing his feet which were wrapped in rags.

“True as gospel. Kings we were, with crowns upon our heads — me and Dravot — poor
Dan — oh, poor, poor Dan, that would never take advice, not though I begged of him!”

“Take the whiskey,” I said, “and take your own time. Tell me all you can recollect of
everything from beginning to end. You got across the border on your camels, Dravot
dressed as a mad priest and you his servant. Do you remember that?”

“I ain’t mad — yet, but I will be that way soon. Of course I remember. Keep looking at
me, or maybe my words will go all to pieces. Keep looking at me in my eyes and don’t
say anything.”

I leaned forward and looked into his face as steadily as I could. He dropped one hand
upon the table and I grasped it by the wrist. It was twisted like a bird’s claw, and upon the
back was a ragged, red, diamond-shaped scar.

“No, don’t look there. Look at me,” said Carnehan.

“That comes afterwards, but for the Lord’s sake don’t distrack me. We left with that
caravan, me and Dravot, playing all sorts of antics to amuse the people we were with.
Dravot used to make us laugh in the evenings when all the people was cooking their
dinners — cooking their dinners, and … what did they do then? They lit little fires with
sparks that went into Dravot’s beard, and we all laughed — fit to die. Little red fires they
was, going into Dravot’s big red beard — so funny.” His eyes left mine and he smiled
foolishly.

“You went as far as Jagdallak with that caravan,” I said at a venture, “after you had lit
those fires. To Jagdallak, where you turned off to try to get into Kafiristan.”

“No, we didn’t neither. What are you talking about? We turned off before Jagdallak,
because we heard the roads was good. But they wasn’t good enough for our two camels
— mine and Dravot’s. When we left the caravan, Dravot took off all his clothes and mine
too, and said we would be heathen, because the Kafirs didn’t allow Mohammedans to talk
to them. So we dressed betwixt and between, and such a sight as Daniel Dravot I never
saw yet nor expect to see again. He burned half his beard, and slung a sheep-skin over his
shoulder, and shaved his head into patterns. He shaved mine, too, and made me wear
outrageous things to look like a heathen. That was in a most mountaineous country, and
our camels couldn’t go along any more because of the mountains. They were tall and
black, and coming home I saw them fight like wild goats — there are lots of goats in
Kafiristan. And these mountains, they never keep still, no more than the goats. Always
fighting they are, and don’t let you sleep at night.”

“Take some more whiskey,” I said, very slowly. “What did you and Daniel Dravot do
when the camels could go no further because of the rough roads that led into Kafiristan?”

“What did which do? There was a party called Peachey Taliaferro Carnehan that was with
Dravot. Shall I tell you about him? He died out there in the cold. Slap from the bridge fell
old Peachey, turning and twisting in the air like a penny whirligig that you can sell to the
Amir — No; they was two for three ha’pence, those whirligigs, or I am much mistaken
and woful sore. And then these camels were no use, and Peachey said to Dravot — ‘For
the Lord’s sake, let’s get out of this before our heads are chopped off,’ and with that they
killed the camels all among the mountains, not having anything in particular to eat, but
first they took off the boxes with the guns and the ammunition, till two men came along
driving four mules. Dravot up and dances in front of them, singing, — ‘Sell me four
mules.’ Says the first man, — ‘If you are rich enough to buy, you are rich enough to rob;’
but before ever he could put his hand to his knife, Dravot breaks his neck over his knee,
and the other party runs away. So Carnehan loaded the mules with the rifles that was
taken off the camels, and together we starts forward into those bitter cold mountainous
parts, and never a road broader than the back of your hand.”

He paused for a moment, while I asked him if he could remember the nature of the
country through which he had journeyed.

“I am telling you as straight as I can, but my head isn’t as good as it might be. They drove
nails through it to make me hear better how Dravot died. The country was mountainous
and the mules were most contrary, and the inhabitants was dispersed and solitary. They
went up and up, and down and down, and that other party Carnehan, was imploring of
Dravot not to sing and whistle so loud, for fear of bringing down the tremenjus
avalanches. But Dravot says that if a King couldn’t sing it wasn’t worth being King, and
whacked the mules over the rump, and never took no heed for ten cold days. We came to
a big level valley all among the mountains, and the mules were near dead, so we killed
them, not having anything in special for them or us to eat. We sat upon the boxes, and
played odd and even with the cartridges that was jolted out.

“Then ten men with bows and arrows ran down that valley, chasing twenty men with
bows and arrows, and the row was tremenjus. They was fair men — fairer than you or me
— with yellow hair and remarkable well built. Says Dravot, unpacking the guns — ‘This
is the beginning of the business. We’ll fight for the ten men,’ and with that he fires two
rifles at the twenty men and drops one of them at two hundred yards from the rock where
we was sitting. The other men began to run, but Carnehan and Dravot sits on the boxes
picking them off at all ranges, up and down the valley. Then we goes up to the ten men
that had run across the snow too, and they fires a footy little arrow at us. Dravot he shoots

above their heads and they all falls down flat. Then he walks over them and kicks them,
and then he lifts them up and shakes hands all around to make them friendly like. He calls
them and gives them the boxes to carry, and waves his hand for all the world as though he
was King already. They takes the boxes and him across the valley and up the hill into a
pine wood on the top, where there was half a dozen big stone idols. Dravot he goes to the
biggest — a fellow they call Imbra — and lays a rifle and a cartridge at his feet, rubbing
his nose respectful with his own nose, patting him on the head, and saluting in front of it.
He turns round to the men and nods his head, and says, — ‘That’s all right. I’m in the
know too, and these old jim-jams are my friends.’ Then he opens his mouth and points
down it, and when the first man brings him food, he says — ‘No;’ and when the second
man brings him food, he says — ‘No;’ but when one of the old priests and the boss of the
village brings him food, he says — ‘Yes;’ very haughty, and eats it slow. That was how
we came to our first village, without any trouble, just as though we had tumbled from the
skies. But we tumbled from one of those damned rope-bridges, you see, and you couldn’t
expect a man to laugh much after that.”

“Take some more whiskey and go on,” I said. “That was the first village you came into.
How did you get to be King?”

Section 3

“I wasn’t King,” said Carnehan. “Dravot he was the King, and a handsome man he looked
with the gold crown on his head and all. Him and the other party stayed in that village,
and every morning Dravot sat by the side of old Imbra, and the people came and
worshipped. That was Dravot’s order. Then a lot of men came into the valley, and
Carnehan and Dravot picks them off with the rifles before they knew where they was, and
runs down into the valley and up again the other side, and finds another village, same as
the first one, and the people all falls down flat on their faces, and Dravot says, — ‘Now
what is the trouble between you two villages?’ and the people points to a woman, as fair
as you or me, that was carried off, and Dravot takes her back to the first village and
counts up the dead — eight there was. For each dead man Dravot pours a little milk on
the ground and waves his arms like a whirligig and, ‘That’s all right,’ says he. Then he
and Carnehan takes the big boss of each village by the arm and walks them down into the
valley, and shows them how to scratch a line with a spear right down the valley, and gives
each a sod of turf from both sides o’ the line. Then all the people comes down and shouts
like the devil and all, and Dravot says, — ‘Go and dig the land, and be fruitful and
multiply,’ which they did, though they didn’t understand. Then we asks the names of
things in their lingo — bread and water and fire and idols and such, and Dravot leads the
priest of each village up to the idol, and says he must sit there and judge the people, and if
anything goes wrong he is to be shot.

“Next week they was all turning up the land in the valley as quiet as bees and much
prettier, and the priests heard all the complaints and told Dravot in dumb show what it
was about. ‘That’s just the beginning,’ says Dravot. ‘They think we’re gods.’ He and
Carnehan picks out twenty good men and shows them how to click off a rifle, and form
fours, and advance in line, and they was very pleased to do so, and clever to see the hang
of it. Then he takes out his pipe and his baccy-pouch and leaves one at one village, and
one at the other, and off we two goes to see what was to be done in the next valley. That
was all rock, and there was a little village there, and Carnehan says, — ‘Send ’em to the
old valley to plant,’ and takes ’em there and gives ’em some land that wasn’t took before.
They were a poor lot, and we blooded ’em with a kid before letting ’em into the new
Kingdom. That was to impress the people, and then they settled down quiet, and
Carnehan went back to Dravot who had got into another valley, all snow and ice and most
mountainous. There was no people there and the Army got afraid, so Dravot shoots one of
them, and goes on till he finds some people in a village, and the Army explains that unless
the people wants to be killed they had better not shoot their little matchlocks; for they had
matchlocks. We makes friends with the priest and I stays there alone with two of the
Army, teaching the men how to drill, and a thundering big Chief comes across the snow
with kettledrums and horns twanging, because he heard there was a new god kicking

about. Carnehan sights for the brown of the men half a mile across the snow and wings
one of them. Then he sends a message to the Chief that, unless he wished to be killed, he
must come and shake hands with me and leave his arms behind. The Chief comes alone
first, and Carnehan shakes hands with him and whirls his arms about, same as Dravot
used, and very much surprised that Chief was, and strokes my eyebrows. Then Carnehan
goes alone to the Chief, and asks him in dumb show if he had an enemy he hated. ‘I
have,’ says the Chief. So Carnehan weeds out the pick of his men, and sets the two of the
Army to show them drill and at the end of two weeks the men can manœuvre about as
well as Volunteers. So he marches with the Chief to a great big plain on the top of a
mountain, and the Chiefs men rushes into a village and takes it; we three Martinis firing
into the brown of the enemy. So we took that village too, and I gives the Chief a rag from
my coat and says, ‘Occupy till I come’: which was scriptural. By way of a reminder, when
me and the Army was eighteen hundred yards away, I drops a bullet near him standing on
the snow, and all the people falls flat on their faces. Then I sends a letter to Dravot,
wherever he be by land or by sea.”

At the risk of throwing the creature out of train I interrupted, — “How could you write a
letter up yonder?”

“The letter? — Oh! — The letter! Keep looking at me between the eyes, please. It was a
string-talk letter, that we’d learned the way of it from a blind beggar in the Punjab.”

I remember that there had once come to the office a blind man with a knotted twig and a
piece of string which he wound round the twig according to some cypher of his own. He
could, after the lapse of days or hours, repeat the sentence which he had reeled up. He had
reduced the alphabet to eleven primitive sounds; and tried to teach me his method, but
failed.

“I sent that letter to Dravot,” said Carnehan; “and told him to come back because this
Kingdom was growing too big for me to handle, and then I struck for the first valley, to
see how the priests were working. They called the village we took along with the Chief,
Bashkai, and the first village we took, Er-Heb. The priest at Er-Heb was doing all right,
but they had a lot of pending cases about land to show me, and some men from another
village had been firing arrows at night. I went out and looked for that village and fired
four rounds at it from a thousand yards. That used all the cartridges I cared to spend, and I
waited for Dravot, who had been away two or three months, and I kept my people quiet.

“One morning I heard the devil’s own noise of drums and horns, and Dan Dravot marches
down the hill with his Army and a tail of hundreds of men, and, which was the most
amazing — a great gold crown on his head. ‘My Gord, Carnehan,’ says Daniel, ‘this is a

tremenjus business, and we’ve got the whole country as far as it’s worth having. I am the
son of Alexander by Queen Semiramis, and you’re my younger brother and a god too! It’s
the biggest thing we’ve ever seen. I’ve been marching and fighting for six weeks with the
Army, and every footy little village for fifty miles has come in rejoiceful; and more than
that, I’ve got the key of the whole show, as you’ll see, and I’ve got a crown for you! I told
’em to make two of ’em at a place called Shu, where the gold lies in the rock like suet in
mutton. Gold I’ve seen, and turquoise I’ve kicked out of the cliffs, and there’s garnets in
the sands of the river, and here’s a chunk of amber that a man brought me. Call up all the
priests and, here, take your crown.’

“One of the men opens a black hair bag and I slips the crown on. It was too small and too
heavy, but I wore it for the glory. Hammered gold it was — five pound weight, like a
hoop of a barrel.

“‘Peachey,’ says Dravot, ‘we don’t want to fight no more. The Craft’s the trick so help
me!’ and he brings forward that same Chief that I left at Bashkai — Billy Fish we called
him afterwards, because he was so like Billy Fish that drove the big tank-engine at Mach
on the Bolan in the old days. ‘Shake hands with him,’ says Dravot, and I shook hands and
nearly dropped, for Billy Fish gave me the Grip. I said nothing, but tried him with the
Fellow Craft Grip. He answers, all right, and I tried the Master’s Grip, but that was a slip.
‘A Fellow Craft he is!’ I says to Dan. ‘Does he know the word?’ ‘He does,’ says Dan,
‘and all the priests know. It’s a miracle! The Chiefs and the priest can work a Fellow
Craft Lodge in a way that’s very like ours, and they’ve cut the marks on the rocks, but
they don’t know the Third Degree, and they’ve come to find out. It’s Gord’s Truth. I’ve
known these long years that the Afghans knew up to the Fellow Craft Degree, but this is a
miracle. A god and a Grand-Master of the Craft am I, and a Lodge in the Third Degree I
will open, and we’ll raise the head priests and the Chiefs of the villages.’

“‘It’s against all the law,’ I says, ‘holding a Lodge without warrant from any one; and we
never held office in any Lodge.’

“‘It’s a master-stroke of policy,’ says Dravot. ‘It means running the country as easy as a
four-wheeled bogy on a down grade. We can’t stop to inquire now, or they’ll turn against
us. I’ve forty Chiefs at my heel, and passed and raised according to their merit they shall
be. Billet these men on the villages and see that we run up a Lodge of some kind. The
temple of Imbra will do for the Lodge-room. The women must make aprons as you show
them. I’ll hold a levee of Chiefs tonight and Lodge to-morrow.’

“I was fair rim off my legs, but I wasn’t such a fool as not to see what a pull this Craft
business gave us. I showed the priests’ families how to make aprons of the degrees, but

for Dravot’s apron the blue border and marks was made of turquoise lumps on white hide,
not cloth. We took a great square stone in the temple for the Master’s chair, and little
stones for the officers’ chairs, and painted the black pavement with white squares, and did
what we could to make things regular.

“At the levee which was held that night on the hillside with big bonfires, Dravot gives out
that him and me were gods and sons of Alexander, and Past Grand-Masters in the Craft,
and was come to make Kafiristan a country where every man should eat in peace and
drink in quiet, and specially obey us. Then the Chiefs come round to shake hands, and
they was so hairy and white and fair it was just shaking hands with old friends. We gave
them names according as they was like men we had known in India — Billy Fish, Holly
Dilworth, Pikky Kergan that was Bazar-master when I was at Mhow, and so on, and so
on.

“The most amazing miracle was at Lodge next night. One of the old priests was watching
us continuous, and I felt uneasy, for I knew we’d have to fudge the Ritual, and I didn’t
know what the men knew. The old priest was a stranger come in from beyond the village
of Bashkai. The minute Dravot puts on the Master’s apron that the girls had made for
him, the priest fetches a whoop and a howl, and tries to overturn the stone that Dravot
was sitting on. ‘It’s all up now,’ I says. ‘That comes of meddling with the Craft without
warrant!’ Dravot never winked an eye, not when ten priests took and tilted over the
Grand-Master’s chair — which was to say the stone of Imbra. The priest begins rubbing
the bottom end of it to clear away the black dirt, and presently he shows all the other
priests the Master’s Mark, same as was on Dravot’s apron, cut into the stone. Not even
the priests of the temple of Imbra knew it was there. The old chap falls flat on his face at
Dravot’s feet and kisses ’em. ‘Luck again,’ says Dravot, across the Lodge to me, ‘they say
it’s the missing Mark that no one could understand the why of. We’re more than safe
now.’ Then he bangs the butt of his gun for a gavel and says:— ‘By virtue of the authority
vested in me by my own right hand and the help of Peachey, I declare myself
Grand-Master of all Freemasonry in Kafiristan in this the Mother Lodge o’ the country,
and King of Kafiristan equally with Peachey!’ At that he puts on his crown and I puts on
mine — I was doing Senior Warden — and we opens the Lodge in most ample form. It
was a amazing miracle! The priests moved in Lodge through the first two degrees almost
without telling, as if the memory was coming back to them. After that, Peachey and
Dravot raised such as was worthy — high priests and Chiefs of far-off villages. Billy Fish
was the first, and I can tell you we scared the soul out of him. It was not in any way
according to Ritual, but it served our turn. We didn’t raise more than ten of the biggest
men because we didn’t want to make the Degree common. And they was clamoring to be
raised.

“‘In another six months,’ says Dravot, ‘we’ll hold another Communication and see how
you are working.’ Then he asks them about their villages, and learns that they was
fighting one against the other and were fair sick and tired of it. And when they wasn’t
doing that they was fighting with the Mohammedans. ‘You can fight those when they
come into our country,’ says Dravot. ‘Tell off every tenth man of your tribes for a
Frontier guard, and send two hundred at a time to this valley to be drilled. Nobody is
going to be shot or speared any more so long as he does well, and I know that you won’t
cheat me because you’re white people — sons of Alexander — and not like common,
black Mohammedans. You are my people and by God,’ says he, running off into English
at the end — ‘I’ll make a damned fine Nation of you, or I’ll die in the making!’

“I can’t tell all we did for the next six months because Dravot did a lot I couldn’t see the
hang of, and he learned their lingo in a way I never could. My work was to help the
people plough, and now and again to go out with some of the Army and see what the
other villages were doing, and make ’em throw rope-bridges across the ravines which cut
up the country horrid. Dravot was very kind to me, but when he walked up and down in
the pine wood pulling that bloody red beard of his with both fists I knew he was thinking
plans I could not advise him about, and I just waited for orders.

“But Dravot never showed me disrespect before the people. They were afraid of me and
the Army, but they loved Dan. He was the best of friends with the priests and the Chiefs;
but any one could come across the hills with a complaint and Dravot would hear him out
fair, and call four priests together and say what was to be done. He used to call in Billy
Fish from Bashkai, and Pikky Kergan from Shu, and an old Chief we called Kafuzelum
— it was like enough to his real name — and hold councils with ’em when there was any
fighting to be done in small villages. That was his Council of War, and the four priests of
Bashkai, Shu, Khawak, and Madora was his Privy Council. Between the lot of ’em they
sent me, with forty men and twenty rifles, and sixty men carrying turquoises, into the
Ghorband country to buy those hand-made Martini rifles, that come out of the Amir’s
workshops at Kabul, from one of the Amir’s Herati regiments that would have sold the
very teeth out of their mouths for turquoises.

“I stayed in Ghorband a month, and gave the Governor the pick of my baskets for
hush-money, and bribed the colonel of the regiment some more, and, between the two and
the tribes-people, we got more than a hundred hand-made Martinis, a hundred good
Kohat Jezails that’ll throw to six hundred yards, and forty manloads of very bad
ammunition for the rifles. I came back with what I had, and distributed ’em among the
men that the Chiefs sent in to me to drill. Dravot was too busy to attend to those things,
but the old Army that we first made helped me, and we turned out five hundred men that
could drill, and two hundred that knew how to hold arms pretty straight. Even those

cork-screwed, hand-made guns was a miracle to them. Dravot talked big about
powder-shops and factories, walking up and down in the pine wood when the winter was
coming on.

“‘I won’t make a Nation,’ says he. ‘I’ll make an Empire! These men aren’t niggers;
they’re English! Look at their eyes — look at their mouths. Look at the way they stand
up. They sit on chairs in their own houses. They’re the Lost Tribes, or something like it,
and they’ve grown to be English. I’ll take a census in the spring if the priests don’t get
frightened. There must be a fair two million of ’em in these hills. The villages are full o’
little children. Two million people — two hundred and fifty thousand fighting men —
and all English! They only want the rifles and a little drilling. Two hundred and fifty
thousand men, ready to cut in on Russia’s right flank when she tries for India! Peachey,
man,’ he says, chewing his beard in great hunks, ‘we shall be Emperors — Emperors of
the Earth! Rajah Brooke will be a suckling to us. I’ll treat with the Viceroy on equal
terms. I’ll ask him to send me twelve picked English — twelve that I know of — to help
us govern a bit. There’s Mackray, Sergeant-pensioner at Segowli — many’s the good
dinner he’s given me, and his wife a pair of trousers. There’s Donkin, the Warder of
Tounghoo Jail; there’s hundreds that I could lay my hand on if I was in India. The
Viceroy shall do it for me. I’ll send a man through in the spring for those men, and I’ll
write for a dispensation from the Grand Lodge for what I’ve done as Grand-Master. That
— and all the Sniders that’ll be thrown out when the native troops in India take up the
Martini. They’ll be worn smooth, but they’ll do for fighting in these hills. Twelve
English, a hundred thousand Sniders run through the Amir’s country in driblets — I’d be
content with twenty thousand in one year — and we’d be an Empire. When everything
was ship-shape, I’d hand over the crown — this crown I’m wearing now — to Queen
Victoria on my knees, and she’d say:— “Rise up, Sir Daniel Dravot.” Oh, its big! It’s big,
I tell you! But there’s so much to be done in every place — Bashkai, Khawak, Shu, and
everywhere else.’

“‘What is it?’ I says. ‘There are no more men coming in to be drilled this autumn. Look at
those fat, black clouds. They’re bringing the snow.’

“‘It isn’t that,’ says Daniel, putting his hand very hard on my shoulder; ‘and I don’t wish
to say anything that’s against you, for no other living man would have followed me and
made me what I am as you have done. You’re a first-class Commander-in-Chief, and the
people know you; but — it’s a big country, and somehow you can’t help me, Peachey, in
the way I want to be helped.’

“‘Go to your blasted priests, then!’ I said, and I was sorry when I made that remark, but it
did hurt me sore to find Daniel talking so superior when I’d drilled all the men, and done

all he told me.

“‘Don’t let’s quarrel, Peachey,’ says Daniel without cursing. ‘You’re a King too, and the
half of this Kingdom is yours; but can’t you see, Peachey, we want cleverer men than us
now — three or four of ’em that we can scatter about for our Deputies? It’s a hugeous
great State, and I can’t always tell the right thing to do, and I haven’t time for all I want to
do, and here’s the winter coming on and all.’ He put half his beard into his mouth, and it
was as red as the gold of his crown.

“‘I’m sorry, Daniel,’ says I. ‘I’ve done all I could. I’ve drilled the men and shown the
people how to stack their oats better, and I’ve brought in those tinware rifles from
Ghorband — but I know what you’re driving at. I take it Kings always feel oppressed that
way.’

“‘There’s another thing too,’ says Dravot, walking up and down. ‘The winter’s coming
and these people won’t be giving much trouble, and if they do we can’t move about. I
want a wife.’

“‘For Gord’s sake leave the women alone!’ I says. ‘We’ve both got all the work we can,
though I am a fool. Remember the Contrack, and keep clear o’ women.’

“‘The Contrack only lasted till such time as we was Kings; and Kings we have been these
months past,’ says Dravot, weighing his crown in his hand. ‘You go get a wife too,
Peachey — a nice, strappin’, plump girl that’ll keep you warm in the winter. They’re
prettier than English girls, and we can take the pick of ’em. Boil ’em once or twice in hot
water, and they’ll come as fair as chicken and ham.’

“‘Don’t tempt me!’ I says. ‘I will not have any dealings with a woman not till we are a
dam’ side more settled than we are now. I’ve been doing the work o’ two men, and
you’ve been doing the work o’ three. Let’s lie off a bit, and see if we can get some better
tobacco from Afghan country and run in some good liquor; but no women.’

“‘Who’s talking o’ women?’ says Dravot. ‘I said wife — a Queen to breed a King’s son
for the King. A Queen out of the strongest tribe, that’ll make them your blood-brothers,
and that’ll lie by your side and tell you all the people thinks about you and their own
affairs. That’s what I want.’

“‘Do you remember that Bengali woman I kept at Mogul Serai when I was plate-layer?’
says I. ‘A fat lot o’ good she was to me. She taught me the lingo and one or two other
things; but what happened? She ran away with the Station Master’s servant and half my

month’s pay. Then she turned up at Dadur Junction in tow of a half-caste, and had the
impidence to say I was her husband — all among the drivers of the running-shed!’

“‘We’ve done with that,’ says Dravot. ‘These women are whiter than you or me, and a
Queen I will have for the winter months.’

“‘For the last time o’ asking, Dan, do not,’ I says. ‘It’ll only bring us harm. The Bible says
that Kings ain’t to waste their strength on women, ’specially when they’ve got a new raw
Kingdom to work over.’

“‘For the last time of answering, I will,’ said Dravot, and he went away through the
pine-trees looking like a big red devil. The low sun hit his crown and beard on one side,
and the two blazed like hot coals.

“But getting a wife was not as easy as Dan thought. He put it before the Council, and
there was no answer till Billy Fish said that he’d better ask the girls. Dravot damned them
all round. ‘What’s wrong with me?’ he shouts, standing by the idol Imbra. ‘Am I a dog or
am I not enough of a man for your wenches? Haven’t I put the shadow of my hand over
this country? Who stopped the last Afghan raid?’ It was me really, but Dravot was too
angry to remember. ‘Who bought your guns? Who repaired the bridges? Who’s the
Grand-Master of the sign cut in the stone?’ and he thumped his hand on the block that he
used to sit on in Lodge, and at Council, which opened like Lodge always. Billy Fish said
nothing and no more did the others. ‘Keep your hair on, Dan,’ said I; ‘and ask the girls.
That’s how it’s done at home, and these people are quite English.’

“‘The marriage of a King is a matter of State,’ says Dan, in a white-hot rage, for he could
feel, I hope, that he was going against his better mind. He walked out of the
Council-room, and the others sat still, looking at the ground.

“‘Billy Fish,’ says I to the Chief of Bashkai, ‘what’s the difficulty here? A straight answer
to a true friend.’ ‘You know,’ says Billy Fish. ‘How should a man tell you who know
everything? How can daughters of men marry gods or devils? It’s not proper.’

“I remembered something like that in the Bible; but if, after seeing us as long as they had,
they still believed we were gods it wasn’t for me to undeceive them.

“‘A god can do anything,’ says I. ‘If the King is fond of a girl he’ll not let her die.’ ‘She’ll
have to,’ said Billy Fish. ‘There are all sorts of gods and devils in these mountains, and
now and again a girl marries one of them and isn’t seen any more. Besides, you two know
the Mark cut in the stone. Only the gods know that. We thought you were men till you

showed the sign of the Master.’

“‘I wished then that we had explained about the loss of the genuine secrets of a
Master-Mason at the first go-off; but I said nothing. All that night there was a blowing of
horns in a little dark temple half-way down the hill, and I heard a girl crying fit to die.
One of the priests told us that she was being prepared to marry the King.

“‘I’ll have no nonsense of that kind,’ says Dan. ‘I don’t want to interfere with your
customs, but I’ll take my own wife. ‘The girl’s a little bit afraid,’ says the priest. ‘She
thinks she’s going to die, and they are a-heartening of her up down in the temple.’

“‘Hearten her very tender, then,’ says Dravot, ‘or I’ll hearten you with the butt of a gun so
that you’ll never want to be heartened again.’ He licked his lips, did Dan, and stayed up
walking about more than half the night, thinking of the wife that he was going to get in
the morning. I wasn’t any means comfortable, for I knew that dealings with a woman in
foreign parts, though you was a crowned King twenty times over, could not but be risky. I
got up very early in the morning while Dravot was asleep, and I saw the priests talking
together in whispers, and the Chiefs talking together too, and they looked at me out of the
corners of their eyes.

“‘What is up, Fish?’ I says to the Bashkai man, who was wrapped up in his furs and
looking splendid to behold.

“‘I can’t rightly say,’ says he; ‘but if you can induce the King to drop all this nonsense
about marriage, you’ll be doing him and me and yourself a great service.’

“‘That I do believe,’ says I. ‘But sure, you know, Billy, as well as me, having fought
against and for us, that the King and me are nothing more than two of the finest men that
God Almighty ever made. Nothing more, I do assure you.’

“‘That may be,’ says Billy Fish, ‘and yet I should be sorry if it was.’ He sinks his head
upon his great fur cloak for a minute and thinks. ‘King,’ says he, ‘be you man or god or
devil, I’ll stick by you to-day. I have twenty of my men with me, and they will follow me.
We’ll go to Bashkai until the storm blows over.’

“A little snow had fallen in the night, and everything was white except the greasy fat
clouds that blew down and down from the north. Dravot came out with his crown on his
head, swinging his arms and stamping his feet, and looking more pleased than Punch.

“‘For the last time, drop it, Dan,’ says I in a whisper. ‘Billy Fish here says that there will

be a row.’

“‘A row among my people!’ says Dravot. ‘Not much. Peachy, you’re a fool not to get a
wife too. Where’s the girl?’ says he with a voice as loud as the braying of a jackass. ‘Call
up all the Chiefs and priests, and let the Emperor see if his wife suits him.’

“There was no need to call any one. They were all there leaning on their guns and spears
round the clearing in the centre of the pine wood. A deputation of priests went down to
the little temple to bring up the girl, and the horns blew up fit to wake the dead. Billy Fish
saunters round and gets as close to Daniel as he could, and behind him stood his twenty
men with matchlocks. Not a man of them under six feet. I was next to Dravot, and behind
me was twenty men of the regular Army. Up comes the girl, and a strapping wench she
was, covered with silver and turquoises but white as death, and looking back every
minute at the priests.

“‘She’ll do,’ said Dan, looking her over. ‘What’s to be afraid of, lass? Come and kiss
me.’ He puts his arm round her. She shuts her eyes, gives a bit of a squeak, and down
goes her face in the side of Dan’s flaming red beard.

“‘The slut’s bitten me!’ says he, clapping his hand to his neck, and, sure enough, his hand
was red with blood. Billy Fish and two of his matchlock-men catches hold of Dan by the
shoulders and drags him into the Bashkai lot, while the priests howls in their lingo, —
‘Neither god nor devil but a man!’ I was all taken aback, for a priest cut at me in front,
and the Army behind began firing into the Bashkai men.

“‘God A-mighty!’ says Dan. ‘What is the meaning o’ this?’

“‘Come back! Come away!’ says Billy Fish. ‘Ruin and Mutiny is the matter. We’ll break
for Bashkai if we can.’

“I tried to give some sort of orders to my men — the men o’ the regular Army — but it
was no use, so I fired into the brown of ’em with an English Martini and drilled three
beggars in a line. The valley was full of shouting, howling creatures, and every soul was
shrieking, ‘Not a god nor a devil but only a man!’ The Bashkai troops stuck to Billy Fish
all they were worth, but their matchlocks wasn’t half as good as the Kabul breech-loaders,
and four of them dropped. Dan was bellowing like a bull, for he was very wrathy; and
Billy Fish had a hard job to prevent him running out at the crowd.

“‘We can’t stand,’ says Billy Fish. ‘Make a run for it down the valley! The whole place is
against us.’ The matchlock-men ran, and we went down the valley in spite of Dravot’s

protestations. He was swearing horribly and crying out that he was a King. The priests
rolled great stones on us, and the regular Army fired hard, and there wasn’t more than six
men, not counting Dan, Billy Fish, and Me, that came down to the bottom of the valley
alive.

“‘Then they stopped firing and the horns in the temple blew again. ‘Come away — for
Gord’s sake come away!’ says Billy Fish. ‘They’ll send runners out to all the villages
before ever we get to Bashkai. I can protect you there, but I can’t do anything now.’

“My own notion is that Dan began to go mad in his head from that hour. He stared up and
down like a stuck pig. Then he was all for walking back alone and killing the priests with
his bare hands; which he could have done. ‘An Emperor am I,’ says Daniel, ‘and next
year I shall be a Knight of the Queen.

“‘All right, Dan,’ says I; ‘but come along now while there’s time.’

“‘It’s your fault,’ says he, ‘for not looking after your Army better. There was mutiny in
the midst, and you didn’t know — you damned engine-driving, plate-laying,
missionary’s-pass-hunting hound!’ He sat upon a rock and called me every foul name he
could lay tongue to. I was too heart-sick to care, though it was all his foolishness that
brought the smash.

“‘I’m sorry, Dan,’ says I, ‘but there’s no accounting for natives. This business is our
Fifty-Seven. Maybe we’ll make something out of it yet, when we’ve got to Bashkai.’

“‘Let’s get to Bashkai, then,’ says Dan, ‘and, by God, when I come back here again I’ll
sweep the valley so there isn’t a bug in a blanket left!’

“‘We walked all that day, and all that night Dan was stumping up and down on the snow,
chewing his beard and muttering to himself.

“‘There’s no hope o’ getting clear,’ said Billy Fish. ‘The priests will have sent runners to
the villages to say that you are only men. Why didn’t you stick on as gods till things was
more settled? I’m a dead man,’ says Billy Fish, and he throws himself down on the snow
and begins to pray to his gods.

“Next morning we was in a cruel bad country — all up and down, no level ground at all,
and no food either. The six Bashkai men looked at Billy Fish hungry-wise as if they
wanted to ask something, but they said never a word. At noon we came to the top of a flat
mountain all covered with snow, and when we climbed up into it, behold, there was an

army in position waiting in the middle!

“‘The runners have been very quick,’ says Billy Fish, with a little bit of a laugh. ‘They are
waiting for us.’

“Three or four men began to fire from the enemy’s side, and a chance shot took Daniel in
the calf of the leg. That brought him to his senses. He looks across the snow at the Army,
and sees the rifles that we had brought into the country.

“‘We’re done for,’ says he. ‘They are Englishmen, these people, — and it’s my blasted
nonsense that has brought you to this. Get back, Billy Fish, and take your men away;
you’ve done what you could, and now cut for it. Carnehan,’ says he, ‘shake hands with
me and go along with Billy. Maybe they won’t kill you. I’ll go and meet ’em alone. It’s
me that did it. Me, the King!’

“‘Go!’ says I. ‘Go to Hell, Dan. I’m with you here. Billy Fish, you clear out, and we two
will meet those folk.’

“‘I’m a Chief,’ says Billy Fish, quite quiet. ‘I stay with you. My men can go.’

“The Bashkai fellows didn’t wait for a second word but ran off, and Dan and Me and
Billy Fish walked across to where the drums were drumming and the horns were horning.
It was cold-awful cold. I’ve got that cold in the back of my head now. There’s a lump of
it there.”

The punkah-coolies had gone to sleep. Two kerosene lamps were blazing in the office,
and the perspiration poured down my face and splashed on the blotter as I leaned forward.
Carnehan was shivering, and I feared that his mind might go. I wiped my face, took a
fresh grip of the piteously mangled hands, and said:— “What happened after that?”

The momentary shift of my eyes had broken the clear current.

“What was you pleased to say?” whined Carnehan. “They took them without any sound.
Not a little whisper all along the snow, not though the King knocked down the first man
that set hand on him — not though old Peachey fired his last cartridge into the brown of
’em. Not a single solitary sound did those swines make. They just closed up, tight, and I
tell you their furs stunk. There was a man called Billy Fish, a good friend of us all, and
they cut his throat, Sir, then and there, like a pig; and the King kicks up the bloody snow
and says:— ‘We’ve had a dashed fine run for our money. What’s coming next?’ But
Peachey, Peachey Taliaferro, I tell you, Sir, in confidence as betwixt two friends, he lost

his head, Sir. No, he didn’t neither. The King lost his head, so he did, all along o’ one of
those cunning rope-bridges. Kindly let me have the paper-cutter, Sir. It tilted this way.
They marched him a mile across that snow to a rope-bridge over a ravine with a river at
the bottom. You may have seen such. They prodded him behind like an ox. ‘Damn your
eyes!’ says the King. ‘D’you suppose I can’t die like a gentleman?’ He turns to Peachey
— Peachey that was crying like a child. ‘I’ve brought you to this, Peachey,’ says he.
‘Brought you out of your happy life to be killed in Kafiristan, where you was late
Commander-in-Chief of the Emperor’s forces. Say you forgive me, Peachey.’ ‘I do,’ says
Peachey. ‘Fully and freely do I forgive you, Dan.’ ‘Shake hands, Peachey,’ says he. ‘I’m
going now.’ Out he goes, looking neither right nor left, and when he was plumb in the
middle of those dizzy dancing ropes, ‘Cut, you beggars,’ he shouts; and they cut, and old
Dan fell, turning round and round and round, twenty thousand miles, for he took half an
hour to fall till he struck the water, and I could see his body caught on a rock with the
gold crown close beside.

“But do you know what they did to Peachey between two pine-trees? They crucified him,
sir, as Peachey’s hands will show. They used wooden pegs for his hands and his feet; and
he didn’t die. He hung there and screamed, and they took him down next day, and said it
was a miracle that he wasn’t dead. They took him down — poor old Peachey that hadn’t
done them any harm — that hadn’t done them any…”

He rocked to and fro and wept bitterly, wiping his eyes with the back of his scarred hands
and moaning like a child for some ten minutes.

“They was cruel enough to feed him up in the temple, because they said he was more of a
god than old Daniel that was a man. Then they turned him out on the snow, and told him
to go home, and Peachey came home in about a year, begging along the roads quite safe;
for Daniel Dravot he walked before and said:— ‘Come along, Peachey. It’s a big thing
we’re doing.’ The mountains they danced at night, and the mountains they tried to fall on
Peachey’s head, but Dan he held up his hand, and Peachey came along bent double. He
never let go of Dan’s hand, and he never let go of Dan’s head. They gave it to him as a
present in the temple, to remind him not to come again, and though the crown was pure
gold, and Peachey was starving, never would Peachey sell the same. You knew Dravot,
sir! You knew Right Worshipful Brother Dravot! Look at him now!”

He fumbled in the mass of rags round his bent waist; brought out a black horsehair bag
embroidered with silver thread; and shook therefrom on to my table — the dried, withered
head of Daniel Dravot! The morning sun that had long been paling the lamps struck the
red beard and blind sunken eyes; struck, too, a heavy circlet of gold studded with raw
turquoises, that Carnehan placed tenderly on the battered temples.

“You behold now,” said Carnehan, “the Emperor in his habit as he lived — the King of
Kafiristan with his crown upon his head. Poor old Daniel that was a monarch once!”

I shuddered, for, in spite of defacements manifold, I recognized the head of the man of
Marwar Junction. Carnehan rose to go. I attempted to stop him. He was not fit to walk
abroad. “Let me take away the whiskey, and give me a little money,” he gasped. “I was a
King once. I’ll go to the Deputy Commissioner and ask to set in the Poor-house till I get
my health. No, thank you, I can’t wait till you get a carriage for me. I’ve urgent private
affairs — in the south — at Marwar.”

He shambled out of the office and departed in the direction of the Deputy
Commissioner’s house. That day at noon I had occasion to go down the blinding hot Mall,
and I saw a crooked man crawling along the white dust of the roadside, his hat in his
hand, quavering dolorously after the fashion of street-singers at Home. There was not a
soul in sight, and he was out of all possible earshot of the houses. And he sang through
his nose, turning his head from right to left:—

“The Son of Man goes forth to war,
A golden crown to gain;

His blood-red banner streams afar—
Who follows in his train?”

I waited to hear no more, but put the poor wretch into my carriage and drove him off to
the nearest missionary for eventual transfer to the Asylum. He repeated the hymn twice
while he was with me whom he did not in the least recognize, and I left him singing to the
missionary.

Two days later I inquired after his welfare of the Superintendent of the Asylum.

“He was admitted suffering from sun-stroke. He died early yesterday morning,” said the
Superintendent. “Is it true that he was half an hour bareheaded in the sun at midday?”

“Yes,” said I, “but do you happen to know if he had anything upon him by any chance
when he died?”

“Not to my knowledge,” said the Superintendent.

And there the matter rests.

Section 3

The Jungle Book 

(1894)

Mowgli's Brothers

     Now Rann the Kite brings home the night
        That Mang the Bat sets free—
     The herds are shut in byre and hut
        For loosed till dawn are we.
     This is the hour of pride and power,
        Talon and tush and claw.
     Oh, hear the call!—Good hunting all
        That keep the Jungle Law!
     Night-Song in the Jungle

It was seven o'clock of a very warm evening in the Seeonee hills when Father Wolf woke
up from his day's rest, scratched himself, yawned, and spread out his paws one after the
other to get rid of the sleepy feeling in their tips. Mother Wolf lay with her big gray nose
dropped across her four tumbling, squealing cubs, and the moon shone into the mouth of
the cave where they all lived. "Augrh!" said Father Wolf. "It is time to hunt again." He
was going to spring down hill when a little shadow with a bushy tail crossed the threshold
and whined: "Good luck go with you, O Chief of the Wolves. And good luck and strong
white teeth go with noble children that they may never forget the hungry in this world."

It was the jackal—Tabaqui, the Dish-licker—and the wolves of India despise Tabaqui
because he runs about making mischief, and telling tales, and eating rags and pieces of
leather from the village rubbish-heaps. But they are afraid of him too, because Tabaqui,
more than anyone else in the jungle, is apt to go mad, and then he forgets that he was ever
afraid of anyone, and runs through the forest biting everything in his way. Even the tiger
runs and hides when little Tabaqui goes mad, for madness is the most disgraceful thing
that can overtake a wild creature. We call it hydrophobia, but they call it dewanee—the
madness—and run.

"Enter, then, and look," said Father Wolf stiffly, "but there is no food here."

"For a wolf, no," said Tabaqui, "but for so mean a person as myself a dry bone is a good
feast. Who are we, the Gidur-log [the jackal people], to pick and choose?" He scuttled to
the back of the cave, where he found the bone of a buck with some meat on it, and sat
cracking the end merrily.

"All thanks for this good meal," he said, licking his lips. "How beautiful are the noble
children! How large are their eyes! And so young too! Indeed, indeed, I might have
remembered that the children of kings are men from the beginning."

Now, Tabaqui knew as well as anyone else that there is nothing so unlucky as to
compliment children to their faces. It pleased him to see Mother and Father Wolf look
uncomfortable.

Tabaqui sat still, rejoicing in the mischief that he had made, and then he said spitefully:

"Shere Khan, the Big One, has shifted his hunting grounds. He will hunt among these
hills for the next moon, so he has told me."

Shere Khan was the tiger who lived near the Waingunga River, twenty miles away.

"He has no right!" Father Wolf began angrily—"By the Law of the Jungle he has no right
to change his quarters without due warning. He will frighten every head of game within
ten miles, and I—I have to kill for two, these days."

"His mother did not call him Lungri [the Lame One] for nothing," said Mother Wolf
quietly. "He has been lame in one foot from his birth. That is why he has only killed
cattle. Now the villagers of the Waingunga are angry with him, and he has come here to
make our villagers angry. They will scour the jungle for him when he is far away, and we
and our children must run when the grass is set alight. Indeed, we are very grateful to
Shere Khan!"

"Shall I tell him of your gratitude?" said Tabaqui.

"Out!" snapped Father Wolf. "Out and hunt with thy master. Thou hast done harm enough
for one night."

"I go," said Tabaqui quietly. "Ye can hear Shere Khan below in the thickets. I might have
saved myself the message."

Father Wolf listened, and below in the valley that ran down to a little river he heard the

dry, angry, snarly, singsong whine of a tiger who has caught nothing and does not care if
all the jungle knows it.

"The fool!" said Father Wolf. "To begin a night's work with that noise! Does he think that
our buck are like his fat Waingunga bullocks?"

"H'sh. It is neither bullock nor buck he hunts to-night," said Mother Wolf. "It is Man."

The whine had changed to a sort of humming purr that seemed to come from every
quarter of the compass. It was the noise that bewilders woodcutters and gypsies sleeping
in the open, and makes them run sometimes into the very mouth of the tiger.

"Man!" said Father Wolf, showing all his white teeth. "Faugh! Are there not enough
beetles and frogs in the tanks that he must eat Man, and on our ground too!"

The Law of the Jungle, which never orders anything without a reason, forbids every beast
to eat Man except when he is killing to show his children how to kill, and then he must
hunt outside the hunting grounds of his pack or tribe. The real reason for this is that
man-killing means, sooner or later, the arrival of white men on elephants, with guns, and
hundreds of brown men with gongs and rockets and torches. Then everybody in the jungle
suffers. The reason the beasts give among themselves is that Man is the weakest and most
defenseless of all living things, and it is unsportsmanlike to touch him. They say too—and
it is true—that man-eaters become mangy, and lose their teeth.

The purr grew louder, and ended in the full-throated "Aaarh!" of the tiger's charge.

Then there was a howl—an untigerish howl—from Shere Khan. "He has missed," said
Mother Wolf. "What is it?"

Father Wolf ran out a few paces and heard Shere Khan muttering and mumbling savagely
as he tumbled about in the scrub.

"The fool has had no more sense than to jump at a woodcutter's campfire, and has burned
his feet," said Father Wolf with a grunt. "Tabaqui is with him."

"Something is coming uphill," said Mother Wolf, twitching one ear. "Get ready."

The bushes rustled a little in the thicket, and Father Wolf dropped with his haunches
under him, ready for his leap. Then, if you had been watching, you would have seen the
most wonderful thing in the world—the wolf checked in mid-spring. He made his bound

before he saw what it was he was jumping at, and then he tried to stop himself. The result
was that he shot up straight into the air for four or five feet, landing almost where he left
ground.

"Man!" he snapped. "A man's cub. Look!"

Directly in front of him, holding on by a low branch, stood a naked brown baby who
could just walk—as soft and as dimpled a little atom as ever came to a wolf's cave at
night. He looked up into Father Wolf's face, and laughed.

"Is that a man's cub?" said Mother Wolf. "I have never seen one. Bring it here."

A Wolf accustomed to moving his own cubs can, if necessary, mouth an egg without
breaking it, and though Father Wolf's jaws closed right on the child's back not a tooth
even scratched the skin as he laid it down among the cubs.

"How little! How naked, and—how bold!" said Mother Wolf softly. The baby was
pushing his way between the cubs to get close to the warm hide. "Ahai! He is taking his
meal with the others. And so this is a man's cub. Now, was there ever a wolf that could
boast of a man's cub among her children?"

"I have heard now and again of such a thing, but never in our Pack or in my time," said
Father Wolf. "He is altogether without hair, and I could kill him with a touch of my foot.
But see, he looks up and is not afraid."

The moonlight was blocked out of the mouth of the cave, for Shere Khan's great square
head and shoulders were thrust into the entrance. Tabaqui, behind him, was squeaking:
"My lord, my lord, it went in here!"

"Shere Khan does us great honor," said Father Wolf, but his eyes were very angry. "What
does Shere Khan need?"

"My quarry. A man's cub went this way," said Shere Khan. "Its parents have run off. Give
it to me."

Shere Khan had jumped at a woodcutter's campfire, as Father Wolf had said, and was
furious from the pain of his burned feet. But Father Wolf knew that the mouth of the cave
was too narrow for a tiger to come in by. Even where he was, Shere Khan's shoulders and
forepaws were cramped for want of room, as a man's would be if he tried to fight in a
barrel.

"The Wolves are a free people," said Father Wolf. "They take orders from the Head of the
Pack, and not from any striped cattle-killer. The man's cub is ours—to kill if we choose."

"Ye choose and ye do not choose! What talk is this of choosing? By the bull that I killed,
am I to stand nosing into your dog's den for my fair dues? It is I, Shere Khan, who
speak!"

The tiger's roar filled the cave with thunder. Mother Wolf shook herself clear of the cubs
and sprang forward, her eyes, like two green moons in the darkness, facing the blazing
eyes of Shere Khan.

"And it is I, Raksha [The Demon], who answers. The man's cub is mine, Lungri—mine to
me! He shall not be killed. He shall live to run with the Pack and to hunt with the Pack;
and in the end, look you, hunter of little naked cubs—frog-eater—fish-killer—he shall
hunt thee! Now get hence, or by the Sambhur that I killed (I eat no starved cattle), back
thou goest to thy mother, burned beast of the jungle, lamer than ever thou camest into the
world! Go!"

Father Wolf looked on amazed. He had almost forgotten the days when he won Mother
Wolf in fair fight from five other wolves, when she ran in the Pack and was not called
The Demon for compliment's sake. Shere Khan might have faced Father Wolf, but he
could not stand up against Mother Wolf, for he knew that where he was she had all the
advantage of the ground, and would fight to the death. So he backed out of the cave
mouth growling, and when he was clear he shouted:

"Each dog barks in his own yard! We will see what the Pack will say to this fostering of
man-cubs. The cub is mine, and to my teeth he will come in the end, O bush-tailed
thieves!"

Mother Wolf threw herself down panting among the cubs, and Father Wolf said to her
gravely:

"Shere Khan speaks this much truth. The cub must be shown to the Pack. Wilt thou still
keep him, Mother?"

"Keep him!" she gasped. "He came naked, by night, alone and very hungry; yet he was
not afraid! Look, he has pushed one of my babes to one side already. And that lame
butcher would have killed him and would have run off to the Waingunga while the
villagers here hunted through all our lairs in revenge! Keep him? Assuredly I will keep
him. Lie still, little frog. O thou Mowgli—for Mowgli the Frog I will call thee—the time

will come when thou wilt hunt Shere Khan as he has hunted thee."

"But what will our Pack say?" said Father Wolf.

The Law of the Jungle lays down very clearly that any wolf may, when he marries,
withdraw from the Pack he belongs to. But as soon as his cubs are old enough to stand on
their feet he must bring them to the Pack Council, which is generally held once a month at
full moon, in order that the other wolves may identify them. After that inspection the cubs
are free to run where they please, and until they have killed their first buck no excuse is
accepted if a grown wolf of the Pack kills one of them. The punishment is death where
the murderer can be found; and if you think for a minute you will see that this must be so.

Father Wolf waited till his cubs could run a little, and then on the night of the Pack
Meeting took them and Mowgli and Mother Wolf to the Council Rock—a hilltop covered
with stones and boulders where a hundred wolves could hide. Akela, the great gray Lone
Wolf, who led all the Pack by strength and cunning, lay out at full length on his rock, and
below him sat forty or more wolves of every size and color, from badger-colored veterans
who could handle a buck alone to young black three-year-olds who thought they could.
The Lone Wolf had led them for a year now. He had fallen twice into a wolf trap in his
youth, and once he had been beaten and left for dead; so he knew the manners and
customs of men. There was very little talking at the Rock. The cubs tumbled over each
other in the center of the circle where their mothers and fathers sat, and now and again a
senior wolf would go quietly up to a cub, look at him carefully, and return to his place on
noiseless feet. Sometimes a mother would push her cub far out into the moonlight to be
sure that he had not been overlooked. Akela from his rock would cry: "Ye know the
Law—ye know the Law. Look well, O Wolves!" And the anxious mothers would take up
the call: "Look—look well, O Wolves!"

At last—and Mother Wolf's neck bristles lifted as the time came—Father Wolf pushed
"Mowgli the Frog," as they called him, into the center, where he sat laughing and playing
with some pebbles that glistened in the moonlight.

Akela never raised his head from his paws, but went on with the monotonous cry: "Look
well!" A muffled roar came up from behind the rocks—the voice of Shere Khan crying:
"The cub is mine. Give him to me. What have the Free People to do with a man's cub?"
Akela never even twitched his ears. All he said was: "Look well, O Wolves! What have
the Free People to do with the orders of any save the Free People? Look well!"

There was a chorus of deep growls, and a young wolf in his fourth year flung back Shere
Khan's question to Akela: "What have the Free People to do with a man's cub?" Now, the

Law of the Jungle lays down that if there is any dispute as to the right of a cub to be
accepted by the Pack, he must be spoken for by at least two members of the Pack who are
not his father and mother.

"Who speaks for this cub?" said Akela. "Among the Free People who speaks?" There was
no answer and Mother Wolf got ready for what she knew would be her last fight, if things
came to fighting.

Then the only other creature who is allowed at the Pack Council—Baloo, the sleepy
brown bear who teaches the wolf cubs the Law of the Jungle: old Baloo, who can come
and go where he pleases because he eats only nuts and roots and honey—rose upon his
hind quarters and grunted.

"The man's cub—the man's cub?" he said. "I speak for the man's cub. There is no harm in
a man's cub. I have no gift of words, but I speak the truth. Let him run with the Pack, and
be entered with the others. I myself will teach him."

"We need yet another," said Akela. "Baloo has spoken, and he is our teacher for the
young cubs. Who speaks besides Baloo?"

A black shadow dropped down into the circle. It was Bagheera the Black Panther, inky
black all over, but with the panther markings showing up in certain lights like the pattern
of watered silk. Everybody knew Bagheera, and nobody cared to cross his path; for he
was as cunning as Tabaqui, as bold as the wild buffalo, and as reckless as the wounded
elephant. But he had a voice as soft as wild honey dripping from a tree, and a skin softer
than down.

"O Akela, and ye the Free People," he purred, "I have no right in your assembly, but the
Law of the Jungle says that if there is a doubt which is not a killing matter in regard to a
new cub, the life of that cub may be bought at a price. And the Law does not say who may
or may not pay that price. Am I right?"

"Good! Good!" said the young wolves, who are always hungry. "Listen to Bagheera. The
cub can be bought for a price. It is the Law."

"Knowing that I have no right to speak here, I ask your leave."

"Speak then," cried twenty voices.

"To kill a naked cub is shame. Besides, he may make better sport for you when he is

grown. Baloo has spoken in his behalf. Now to Baloo's word I will add one bull, and a fat
one, newly killed, not half a mile from here, if ye will accept the man's cub according to
the Law. Is it difficult?"

There was a clamor of scores of voices, saying: "What matter? He will die in the winter
rains. He will scorch in the sun. What harm can a naked frog do us? Let him run with the
Pack. Where is the bull, Bagheera? Let him be accepted." And then came Akela's deep
bay, crying: "Look well—look well, O Wolves!"

Mowgli was still deeply interested in the pebbles, and he did not notice when the wolves
came and looked at him one by one. At last they all went down the hill for the dead bull,
and only Akela, Bagheera, Baloo, and Mowgli's own wolves were left. Shere Khan roared
still in the night, for he was very angry that Mowgli had not been handed over to him.

"Ay, roar well," said Bagheera, under his whiskers, "for the time will come when this
naked thing will make thee roar to another tune, or I know nothing of man."

"It was well done," said Akela. "Men and their cubs are very wise. He may be a help in
time."

"Truly, a help in time of need; for none can hope to lead the Pack forever," said Bagheera.

Akela said nothing. He was thinking of the time that comes to every leader of every pack
when his strength goes from him and he gets feebler and feebler, till at last he is killed by
the wolves and a new leader comes up—to be killed in his turn.

"Take him away," he said to Father Wolf, "and train him as befits one of the Free People."

And that is how Mowgli was entered into the Seeonee Wolf Pack for the price of a bull
and on Baloo's good word.

Now you must be content to skip ten or eleven whole years, and only guess at all the
wonderful life that Mowgli led among the wolves, because if it were written out it would
fill ever so many books. He grew up with the cubs, though they, of course, were grown
wolves almost before he was a child. And Father Wolf taught him his business, and the
meaning of things in the jungle, till every rustle in the grass, every breath of the warm
night air, every note of the owls above his head, every scratch of a bat's claws as it
roosted for a while in a tree, and every splash of every little fish jumping in a pool meant
just as much to him as the work of his office means to a business man. When he was not
learning he sat out in the sun and slept, and ate and went to sleep again. When he felt dirty

or hot he swam in the forest pools; and when he wanted honey (Baloo told him that honey
and nuts were just as pleasant to eat as raw meat) he climbed up for it, and that Bagheera
showed him how to do. Bagheera would lie out on a branch and call, "Come along, Little
Brother," and at first Mowgli would cling like the sloth, but afterward he would fling
himself through the branches almost as boldly as the gray ape. He took his place at the
Council Rock, too, when the Pack met, and there he discovered that if he stared hard at
any wolf, the wolf would be forced to drop his eyes, and so he used to stare for fun. At
other times he would pick the long thorns out of the pads of his friends, for wolves suffer
terribly from thorns and burs in their coats. He would go down the hillside into the
cultivated lands by night, and look very curiously at the villagers in their huts, but he had
a mistrust of men because Bagheera showed him a square box with a drop gate so
cunningly hidden in the jungle that he nearly walked into it, and told him that it was a
trap. He loved better than anything else to go with Bagheera into the dark warm heart of
the forest, to sleep all through the drowsy day, and at night see how Bagheera did his
killing. Bagheera killed right and left as he felt hungry, and so did Mowgli—with one
exception. As soon as he was old enough to understand things, Bagheera told him that he
must never touch cattle because he had been bought into the Pack at the price of a bull's
life. "All the jungle is thine," said Bagheera, "and thou canst kill everything that thou art
strong enough to kill; but for the sake of the bull that bought thee thou must never kill or
eat any cattle young or old. That is the Law of the Jungle." Mowgli obeyed faithfully.

And he grew and grew strong as a boy must grow who does not know that he is learning
any lessons, and who has nothing in the world to think of except things to eat.

Mother Wolf told him once or twice that Shere Khan was not a creature to be trusted, and
that some day he must kill Shere Khan. But though a young wolf would have remembered
that advice every hour, Mowgli forgot it because he was only a boy—though he would
have called himself a wolf if he had been able to speak in any human tongue.

Shere Khan was always crossing his path in the jungle, for as Akela grew older and
feebler the lame tiger had come to be great friends with the younger wolves of the Pack,
who followed him for scraps, a thing Akela would never have allowed if he had dared to
push his authority to the proper bounds. Then Shere Khan would flatter them and wonder
that such fine young hunters were content to be led by a dying wolf and a man's cub.
"They tell me," Shere Khan would say, "that at Council ye dare not look him between the
eyes." And the young wolves would growl and bristle.

Bagheera, who had eyes and ears everywhere, knew something of this, and once or twice
he told Mowgli in so many words that Shere Khan would kill him some day. Mowgli
would laugh and answer: "I have the Pack and I have thee; and Baloo, though he is so

lazy, might strike a blow or two for my sake. Why should I be afraid?"

It was one very warm day that a new notion came to Bagheera—born of something that
he had heard. Perhaps Ikki the Porcupine had told him; but he said to Mowgli when they
were deep in the jungle, as the boy lay with his head on Bagheera's beautiful black skin,
"Little Brother, how often have I told thee that Shere Khan is thy enemy?"

"As many times as there are nuts on that palm," said Mowgli, who, naturally, could not
count. "What of it? I am sleepy, Bagheera, and Shere Khan is all long tail and loud
talk—like Mao, the Peacock."

"But this is no time for sleeping. Baloo knows it; I know it; the Pack know it; and even
the foolish, foolish deer know. Tabaqui has told thee too."

"Ho! ho!" said Mowgli. "Tabaqui came to me not long ago with some rude talk that I was
a naked man's cub and not fit to dig pig-nuts. But I caught Tabaqui by the tail and swung
him twice against a palm-tree to teach him better manners."

"That was foolishness, for though Tabaqui is a mischief-maker, he would have told thee
of something that concerned thee closely. Open those eyes, Little Brother. Shere Khan
dare not kill thee in the jungle. But remember, Akela is very old, and soon the day comes
when he cannot kill his buck, and then he will be leader no more. Many of the wolves that
looked thee over when thou wast brought to the Council first are old too, and the young
wolves believe, as Shere Khan has taught them, that a man-cub has no place with the
Pack. In a little time thou wilt be a man."

"And what is a man that he should not run with his brothers?" said Mowgli. "I was born
in the jungle. I have obeyed the Law of the Jungle, and there is no wolf of ours from
whose paws I have not pulled a thorn. Surely they are my brothers!"

Bagheera stretched himself at full length and half shut his eyes. "Little Brother," said he,
"feel under my jaw."

Mowgli put up his strong brown hand, and just under Bagheera's silky chin, where the
giant rolling muscles were all hid by the glossy hair, he came upon a little bald spot.

"There is no one in the jungle that knows that I, Bagheera, carry that mark—the mark of
the collar; and yet, Little Brother, I was born among men, and it was among men that my
mother died—in the cages of the king's palace at Oodeypore. It was because of this that I
paid the price for thee at the Council when thou wast a little naked cub. Yes, I too was

born among men. I had never seen the jungle. They fed me behind bars from an iron pan
till one night I felt that I was Bagheera—the Panther—and no man's plaything, and I
broke the silly lock with one blow of my paw and came away. And because I had learned
the ways of men, I became more terrible in the jungle than Shere Khan. Is it not so?"

"Yes," said Mowgli, "all the jungle fear Bagheera—all except Mowgli."

"Oh, thou art a man's cub," said the Black Panther very tenderly. "And even as I returned
to my jungle, so thou must go back to men at last—to the men who are thy brothers—if
thou art not killed in the Council."

"But why—but why should any wish to kill me?" said Mowgli.

"Look at me," said Bagheera. And Mowgli looked at him steadily between the eyes. The
big panther turned his head away in half a minute.

"That is why," he said, shifting his paw on the leaves. "Not even I can look thee between
the eyes, and I was born among men, and I love thee, Little Brother. The others they hate
thee because their eyes cannot meet thine; because thou art wise; because thou hast pulled
out thorns from their feet—because thou art a man."

"I did not know these things," said Mowgli sullenly, and he frowned under his heavy
black eyebrows.

"What is the Law of the Jungle? Strike first and then give tongue. By thy very
carelessness they know that thou art a man. But be wise. It is in my heart that when Akela
misses his next kill—and at each hunt it costs him more to pin the buck—the Pack will
turn against him and against thee. They will hold a jungle Council at the Rock, and
then—and then—I have it!" said Bagheera, leaping up. "Go thou down quickly to the
men's huts in the valley, and take some of the Red Flower which they grow there, so that
when the time comes thou mayest have even a stronger friend than I or Baloo or those of
the Pack that love thee. Get the Red Flower."

By Red Flower Bagheera meant fire, only no creature in the jungle will call fire by its
proper name. Every beast lives in deadly fear of it, and invents a hundred ways of
describing it.

"The Red Flower?" said Mowgli. "That grows outside their huts in the twilight. I will get
some."

"There speaks the man's cub," said Bagheera proudly. "Remember that it grows in little
pots. Get one swiftly, and keep it by thee for time of need."

"Good!" said Mowgli. "I go. But art thou sure, O my Bagheera"—he slipped his arm
around the splendid neck and looked deep into the big eyes—"art thou sure that all this is
Shere Khan's doing?"

"By the Broken Lock that freed me, I am sure, Little Brother."

"Then, by the Bull that bought me, I will pay Shere Khan full tale for this, and it may be a
little over," said Mowgli, and he bounded away.

"That is a man. That is all a man," said Bagheera to himself, lying down again. "Oh,
Shere Khan, never was a blacker hunting than that frog-hunt of thine ten years ago!"

Mowgli was far and far through the forest, running hard, and his heart was hot in him. He
came to the cave as the evening mist rose, and drew breath, and looked down the valley.
The cubs were out, but Mother Wolf, at the back of the cave, knew by his breathing that
something was troubling her frog.

"What is it, Son?" she said.

"Some bat's chatter of Shere Khan," he called back. "I hunt among the plowed fields
tonight," and he plunged downward through the bushes, to the stream at the bottom of the
valley. There he checked, for he heard the yell of the Pack hunting, heard the bellow of a
hunted Sambhur, and the snort as the buck turned at bay. Then there were wicked, bitter
howls from the young wolves: "Akela! Akela! Let the Lone Wolf show his strength.
Room for the leader of the Pack! Spring, Akela!"

The Lone Wolf must have sprung and missed his hold, for Mowgli heard the snap of his
teeth and then a yelp as the Sambhur knocked him over with his forefoot.

He did not wait for anything more, but dashed on; and the yells grew fainter behind him
as he ran into the croplands where the villagers lived.

"Bagheera spoke truth," he panted, as he nestled down in some cattle fodder by the
window of a hut. "To-morrow is one day both for Akela and for me."

Then he pressed his face close to the window and watched the fire on the hearth. He saw
the husbandman's wife get up and feed it in the night with black lumps. And when the

morning came and the mists were all white and cold, he saw the man's child pick up a
wicker pot plastered inside with earth, fill it with lumps of red-hot charcoal, put it under
his blanket, and go out to tend the cows in the byre.

"Is that all?" said Mowgli. "If a cub can do it, there is nothing to fear." So he strode round
the corner and met the boy, took the pot from his hand, and disappeared into the mist
while the boy howled with fear.

"They are very like me," said Mowgli, blowing into the pot as he had seen the woman do.
"This thing will die if I do not give it things to eat"; and he dropped twigs and dried bark
on the red stuff. Halfway up the hill he met Bagheera with the morning dew shining like
moonstones on his coat.

"Akela has missed," said the Panther. "They would have killed him last night, but they
needed thee also. They were looking for thee on the hill."

"I was among the plowed lands. I am ready. See!" Mowgli held up the fire-pot.

"Good! Now, I have seen men thrust a dry branch into that stuff, and presently the Red
Flower blossomed at the end of it. Art thou not afraid?"

"No. Why should I fear? I remember now—if it is not a dream—how, before I was a
Wolf, I lay beside the Red Flower, and it was warm and pleasant."

All that day Mowgli sat in the cave tending his fire pot and dipping dry branches into it to
see how they looked. He found a branch that satisfied him, and in the evening when
Tabaqui came to the cave and told him rudely enough that he was wanted at the Council
Rock, he laughed till Tabaqui ran away. Then Mowgli went to the Council, still laughing.

Akela the Lone Wolf lay by the side of his rock as a sign that the leadership of the Pack
was open, and Shere Khan with his following of scrap-fed wolves walked to and fro
openly being flattered. Bagheera lay close to Mowgli, and the fire pot was between
Mowgli's knees. When they were all gathered together, Shere Khan began to speak—a
thing he would never have dared to do when Akela was in his prime.

"He has no right," whispered Bagheera. "Say so. He is a dog's son. He will be frightened."

Mowgli sprang to his feet. "Free People," he cried, "does Shere Khan lead the Pack?
What has a tiger to do with our leadership?"

"Seeing that the leadership is yet open, and being asked to speak—" Shere Khan began.

"By whom?" said Mowgli. "Are we all jackals, to fawn on this cattle butcher? The
leadership of the Pack is with the Pack alone."

There were yells of "Silence, thou man's cub!" "Let him speak. He has kept our Law"; and
at last the seniors of the Pack thundered: "Let the Dead Wolf speak." When a leader of the
Pack has missed his kill, he is called the Dead Wolf as long as he lives, which is not long.

Akela raised his old head wearily:—

"Free People, and ye too, jackals of Shere Khan, for twelve seasons I have led ye to and
from the kill, and in all that time not one has been trapped or maimed. Now I have missed
my kill. Ye know how that plot was made. Ye know how ye brought me up to an untried
buck to make my weakness known. It was cleverly done. Your right is to kill me here on
the Council Rock, now. Therefore, I ask, who comes to make an end of the Lone Wolf?
For it is my right, by the Law of the Jungle, that ye come one by one."

There was a long hush, for no single wolf cared to fight Akela to the death. Then Shere
Khan roared: "Bah! What have we to do with this toothless fool? He is doomed to die! It
is the man-cub who has lived too long. Free People, he was my meat from the first. Give
him to me. I am weary of this man-wolf folly. He has troubled the jungle for ten seasons.
Give me the man-cub, or I will hunt here always, and not give you one bone. He is a man,
a man's child, and from the marrow of my bones I hate him!"

Then more than half the Pack yelled: "A man! A man! What has a man to do with us? Let
him go to his own place."

"And turn all the people of the villages against us?" clamored Shere Khan. "No, give him
to me. He is a man, and none of us can look him between the eyes."

Akela lifted his head again and said, "He has eaten our food. He has slept with us. He has
driven game for us. He has broken no word of the Law of the Jungle."

"Also, I paid for him with a bull when he was accepted. The worth of a bull is little, but
Bagheera's honor is something that he will perhaps fight for," said Bagheera in his
gentlest voice.

"A bull paid ten years ago!" the Pack snarled. "What do we care for bones ten years old?"

"Or for a pledge?" said Bagheera, his white teeth bared under his lip. "Well are ye called
the Free People!"

"No man's cub can run with the people of the jungle," howled Shere Khan. "Give him to
me!"

"He is our brother in all but blood," Akela went on, "and ye would kill him here! In truth,
I have lived too long. Some of ye are eaters of cattle, and of others I have heard that,
under Shere Khan's teaching, ye go by dark night and snatch children from the villager's
doorstep. Therefore I know ye to be cowards, and it is to cowards I speak. It is certain that
I must die, and my life is of no worth, or I would offer that in the man-cub's place. But for
the sake of the Honor of the Pack,—a little matter that by being without a leader ye have
forgotten,—I promise that if ye let the man-cub go to his own place, I will not, when my
time comes to die, bare one tooth against ye. I will die without fighting. That will at least
save the Pack three lives. More I cannot do; but if ye will, I can save ye the shame that
comes of killing a brother against whom there is no fault—a brother spoken for and
bought into the Pack according to the Law of the Jungle."

"He is a man—a man—a man!" snarled the Pack. And most of the wolves began to gather
round Shere Khan, whose tail was beginning to switch.

"Now the business is in thy hands," said Bagheera to Mowgli. "We can do no more except
fight."

Mowgli stood upright—the fire pot in his hands. Then he stretched out his arms, and
yawned in the face of the Council; but he was furious with rage and sorrow, for, wolflike,
the wolves had never told him how they hated him. "Listen you!" he cried. "There is no
need for this dog's jabber. Ye have told me so often tonight that I am a man (and indeed I
would have been a wolf with you to my life's end) that I feel your words are true. So I do
not call ye my brothers any more, but sag [dogs], as a man should. What ye will do, and
what ye will not do, is not yours to say. That matter is with me; and that we may see the
matter more plainly, I, the man, have brought here a little of the Red Flower which ye,
dogs, fear."

He flung the fire pot on the ground, and some of the red coals lit a tuft of dried moss that
flared up, as all the Council drew back in terror before the leaping flames.

Mowgli thrust his dead branch into the fire till the twigs lit and crackled, and whirled it
above his head among the cowering wolves.

"Thou art the master," said Bagheera in an undertone. "Save Akela from the death. He
was ever thy friend."

Akela, the grim old wolf who had never asked for mercy in his life, gave one piteous look
at Mowgli as the boy stood all naked, his long black hair tossing over his shoulders in the
light of the blazing branch that made the shadows jump and quiver.

"Good!" said Mowgli, staring round slowly. "I see that ye are dogs. I go from you to my
own people—if they be my own people. The jungle is shut to me, and I must forget your
talk and your companionship. But I will be more merciful than ye are. Because I was all
but your brother in blood, I promise that when I am a man among men I will not betray ye
to men as ye have betrayed me." He kicked the fire with his foot, and the sparks flew up.
"There shall be no war between any of us in the Pack. But here is a debt to pay before I
go." He strode forward to where Shere Khan sat blinking stupidly at the flames, and
caught him by the tuft on his chin. Bagheera followed in case of accidents. "Up, dog!"
Mowgli cried. "Up, when a man speaks, or I will set that coat ablaze!"

Shere Khan's ears lay flat back on his head, and he shut his eyes, for the blazing branch
was very near.

"This cattle-killer said he would kill me in the Council because he had not killed me when
I was a cub. Thus and thus, then, do we beat dogs when we are men. Stir a whisker,
Lungri, and I ram the Red Flower down thy gullet!" He beat Shere Khan over the head
with the branch, and the tiger whimpered and whined in an agony of fear.

"Pah! Singed jungle cat—go now! But remember when next I come to the Council Rock,
as a man should come, it will be with Shere Khan's hide on my head. For the rest, Akela
goes free to live as he pleases. Ye will not kill him, because that is not my will. Nor do I
think that ye will sit here any longer, lolling out your tongues as though ye were
somebodies, instead of dogs whom I drive out—thus! Go!" The fire was burning furiously
at the end of the branch, and Mowgli struck right and left round the circle, and the wolves
ran howling with the sparks burning their fur. At last there were only Akela, Bagheera,
and perhaps ten wolves that had taken Mowgli's part. Then something began to hurt
Mowgli inside him, as he had never been hurt in his life before, and he caught his breath
and sobbed, and the tears ran down his face.

"What is it? What is it?" he said. "I do not wish to leave the jungle, and I do not know
what this is. Am I dying, Bagheera?"

"No, Little Brother. That is only tears such as men use," said Bagheera. "Now I know

thou art a man, and a man's cub no longer. The jungle is shut indeed to thee
henceforward. Let them fall, Mowgli. They are only tears." So Mowgli sat and cried as
though his heart would break; and he had never cried in all his life before.

"Now," he said, "I will go to men. But first I must say farewell to my mother." And he
went to the cave where she lived with Father Wolf, and he cried on her coat, while the
four cubs howled miserably.

"Ye will not forget me?" said Mowgli.

"Never while we can follow a trail," said the cubs. "Come to the foot of the hill when
thou art a man, and we will talk to thee; and we will come into the croplands to play with
thee by night."

"Come soon!" said Father Wolf. "Oh, wise little frog, come again soon; for we be old, thy
mother and I."

"Come soon," said Mother Wolf, "little naked son of mine. For, listen, child of man, I
loved thee more than ever I loved my cubs."

"I will surely come," said Mowgli. "And when I come it will be to lay out Shere Khan's
hide upon the Council Rock. Do not forget me! Tell them in the jungle never to forget
me!"

The dawn was beginning to break when Mowgli went down the hillside alone, to meet
those mysterious things that are called men.

Section 4

Kaa’s Hunting

     His spots are the joy of the Leopard: his horns are the
        Buffalo's pride.
     Be clean, for the strength of the hunter is known by the
        gloss of his hide.
     If ye find that the Bullock can toss you, or the heavy-browed
        Sambhur can gore;
     Ye need not stop work to inform us: we knew it ten seasons
        before.
     Oppress not the cubs of the stranger, but hail them as Sister
        and Brother,
     For though they are little and fubsy, it may be the Bear is
        their mother.
     "There is none like to me!" says the Cub in the pride of his
        earliest kill;
     But the jungle is large and the Cub he is small.  Let him
        think and be still.

                                 Maxims of Baloo

All that is told here happened some time before Mowgli was turned out of the Seeonee
Wolf Pack, or revenged himself on Shere Khan the tiger. It was in the days when Baloo
was teaching him the Law of the Jungle. The big, serious, old brown bear was delighted
to have so quick a pupil, for the young wolves will only learn as much of the Law of the
Jungle as applies to their own pack and tribe, and run away as soon as they can repeat the
Hunting Verse—"Feet that make no noise; eyes that can see in the dark; ears that can hear
the winds in their lairs, and sharp white teeth, all these things are the marks of our
brothers except Tabaqui the Jackal and the Hyaena whom we hate." But Mowgli, as a
man-cub, had to learn a great deal more than this. Sometimes Bagheera the Black Panther
would come lounging through the jungle to see how his pet was getting on, and would
purr with his head against a tree while Mowgli recited the day's lesson to Baloo. The boy
could climb almost as well as he could swim, and swim almost as well as he could run. So
Baloo, the Teacher of the Law, taught him the Wood and Water Laws: how to tell a rotten
branch from a sound one; how to speak politely to the wild bees when he came upon a
hive of them fifty feet above ground; what to say to Mang the Bat when he disturbed him
in the branches at midday; and how to warn the water-snakes in the pools before he

splashed down among them. None of the Jungle People like being disturbed, and all are
very ready to fly at an intruder. Then, too, Mowgli was taught the Strangers' Hunting Call,
which must be repeated aloud till it is answered, whenever one of the Jungle-People hunts
outside his own grounds. It means, translated, "Give me leave to hunt here because I am
hungry." And the answer is, "Hunt then for food, but not for pleasure."

All this will show you how much Mowgli had to learn by heart, and he grew very tired of
saying the same thing over a hundred times. But, as Baloo said to Bagheera, one day
when Mowgli had been cuffed and run off in a temper, "A man's cub is a man's cub, and
he must learn all the Law of the Jungle."

"But think how small he is," said the Black Panther, who would have spoiled Mowgli if
he had had his own way. "How can his little head carry all thy long talk?"

"Is there anything in the jungle too little to be killed? No. That is why I teach him these
things, and that is why I hit him, very softly, when he forgets."

"Softly! What dost thou know of softness, old Iron-feet?" Bagheera grunted. "His face is
all bruised today by thy—softness. Ugh."

"Better he should be bruised from head to foot by me who love him than that he should
come to harm through ignorance," Baloo answered very earnestly. "I am now teaching
him the Master Words of the Jungle that shall protect him with the birds and the Snake
People, and all that hunt on four feet, except his own pack. He can now claim protection,
if he will only remember the words, from all in the jungle. Is not that worth a little
beating?"

"Well, look to it then that thou dost not kill the man-cub. He is no tree trunk to sharpen
thy blunt claws upon. But what are those Master Words? I am more likely to give help
than to ask it"—Bagheera stretched out one paw and admired the steel-blue,
ripping-chisel talons at the end of it—"still I should like to know."

"I will call Mowgli and he shall say them—if he will. Come, Little Brother!"

"My head is ringing like a bee tree," said a sullen little voice over their heads, and
Mowgli slid down a tree trunk very angry and indignant, adding as he reached the ground:
"I come for Bagheera and not for thee, fat old Baloo!"

"That is all one to me," said Baloo, though he was hurt and grieved. "Tell Bagheera, then,
the Master Words of the Jungle that I have taught thee this day."

"Master Words for which people?" said Mowgli, delighted to show off. "The jungle has
many tongues. I know them all."

"A little thou knowest, but not much. See, O Bagheera, they never thank their teacher.
Not one small wolfling has ever come back to thank old Baloo for his teachings. Say the
word for the Hunting-People, then—great scholar."

"We be of one blood, ye and I," said Mowgli, giving the words the Bear accent which all
the Hunting People use.

"Good. Now for the birds."

Mowgli repeated, with the Kite's whistle at the end of the sentence.

"Now for the Snake-People," said Bagheera.

The answer was a perfectly indescribable hiss, and Mowgli kicked up his feet behind,
clapped his hands together to applaud himself, and jumped on to Bagheera's back, where
he sat sideways, drumming with his heels on the glossy skin and making the worst faces
he could think of at Baloo.

"There—there! That was worth a little bruise," said the brown bear tenderly. "Some day
thou wilt remember me." Then he turned aside to tell Bagheera how he had begged the
Master Words from Hathi the Wild Elephant, who knows all about these things, and how
Hathi had taken Mowgli down to a pool to get the Snake Word from a water-snake,
because Baloo could not pronounce it, and how Mowgli was now reasonably safe against
all accidents in the jungle, because neither snake, bird, nor beast would hurt him.

"No one then is to be feared," Baloo wound up, patting his big furry stomach with pride.

"Except his own tribe," said Bagheera, under his breath; and then aloud to Mowgli, "Have
a care for my ribs, Little Brother! What is all this dancing up and down?"

Mowgli had been trying to make himself heard by pulling at Bagheera's shoulder fur and
kicking hard. When the two listened to him he was shouting at the top of his voice, "And
so I shall have a tribe of my own, and lead them through the branches all day long."

"What is this new folly, little dreamer of dreams?" said Bagheera.

"Yes, and throw branches and dirt at old Baloo," Mowgli went on. "They have promised

me this. Ah!"

"Whoof!" Baloo's big paw scooped Mowgli off Bagheera's back, and as the boy lay
between the big fore-paws he could see the Bear was angry.

"Mowgli," said Baloo, "thou hast been talking with the Bandar-log—the Monkey People."

Mowgli looked at Bagheera to see if the Panther was angry too, and Bagheera's eyes were
as hard as jade stones.

"Thou hast been with the Monkey People—the gray apes—the people without a law—the
eaters of everything. That is great shame."

"When Baloo hurt my head," said Mowgli (he was still on his back), "I went away, and
the gray apes came down from the trees and had pity on me. No one else cared." He
snuffled a little.

"The pity of the Monkey People!" Baloo snorted. "The stillness of the mountain stream!
The cool of the summer sun! And then, man-cub?"

"And then, and then, they gave me nuts and pleasant things to eat, and they—they carried
me in their arms up to the top of the trees and said I was their blood brother except that I
had no tail, and should be their leader some day."

"They have no leader," said Bagheera. "They lie. They have always lied."

"They were very kind and bade me come again. Why have I never been taken among the
Monkey People? They stand on their feet as I do. They do not hit me with their hard
paws. They play all day. Let me get up! Bad Baloo, let me up! I will play with them
again."

"Listen, man-cub," said the Bear, and his voice rumbled like thunder on a hot night. "I
have taught thee all the Law of the Jungle for all the peoples of the jungle—except the
Monkey-Folk who live in the trees. They have no law. They are outcasts. They have no
speech of their own, but use the stolen words which they overhear when they listen, and
peep, and wait up above in the branches. Their way is not our way. They are without
leaders. They have no remembrance. They boast and chatter and pretend that they are a
great people about to do great affairs in the jungle, but the falling of a nut turns their
minds to laughter and all is forgotten. We of the jungle have no dealings with them. We
do not drink where the monkeys drink; we do not go where the monkeys go; we do not

hunt where they hunt; we do not die where they die. Hast thou ever heard me speak of the
Bandar-log till today?"

"No," said Mowgli in a whisper, for the forest was very still now Baloo had finished.

"The Jungle-People put them out of their mouths and out of their minds. They are very
many, evil, dirty, shameless, and they desire, if they have any fixed desire, to be noticed
by the Jungle People. But we do not notice them even when they throw nuts and filth on
our heads."

He had hardly spoken when a shower of nuts and twigs spattered down through the
branches; and they could hear coughings and howlings and angry jumpings high up in the
air among the thin branches.

"The Monkey-People are forbidden," said Baloo, "forbidden to the Jungle-People.
Remember."

"Forbidden," said Bagheera, "but I still think Baloo should have warned thee against
them."

"I—I? How was I to guess he would play with such dirt. The Monkey People! Faugh!"

A fresh shower came down on their heads and the two trotted away, taking Mowgli with
them. What Baloo had said about the monkeys was perfectly true. They belonged to the
tree-tops, and as beasts very seldom look up, there was no occasion for the monkeys and
the Jungle-People to cross each other's path. But whenever they found a sick wolf, or a
wounded tiger, or bear, the monkeys would torment him, and would throw sticks and nuts
at any beast for fun and in the hope of being noticed. Then they would howl and shriek
senseless songs, and invite the Jungle-People to climb up their trees and fight them, or
would start furious battles over nothing among themselves, and leave the dead monkeys
where the Jungle-People could see them. They were always just going to have a leader,
and laws and customs of their own, but they never did, because their memories would not
hold over from day to day, and so they compromised things by making up a saying, "What
the Bandar-log think now the jungle will think later," and that comforted them a great
deal. None of the beasts could reach them, but on the other hand none of the beasts would
notice them, and that was why they were so pleased when Mowgli came to play with
them, and they heard how angry Baloo was.

They never meant to do any more—the Bandar-log never mean anything at all; but one of
them invented what seemed to him a brilliant idea, and he told all the others that Mowgli

would be a useful person to keep in the tribe, because he could weave sticks together for
protection from the wind; so, if they caught him, they could make him teach them. Of
course Mowgli, as a woodcutter's child, inherited all sorts of instincts, and used to make
little huts of fallen branches without thinking how he came to do it. The Monkey-People,
watching in the trees, considered his play most wonderful. This time, they said, they were
really going to have a leader and become the wisest people in the jungle—so wise that
everyone else would notice and envy them. Therefore they followed Baloo and Bagheera
and Mowgli through the jungle very quietly till it was time for the midday nap, and
Mowgli, who was very much ashamed of himself, slept between the Panther and the Bear,
resolving to have no more to do with the Monkey People.

The next thing he remembered was feeling hands on his legs and arms—hard, strong,
little hands—and then a swash of branches in his face, and then he was staring down
through the swaying boughs as Baloo woke the jungle with his deep cries and Bagheera
bounded up the trunk with every tooth bared. The Bandar-log howled with triumph and
scuffled away to the upper branches where Bagheera dared not follow, shouting: "He has
noticed us! Bagheera has noticed us. All the Jungle-People admire us for our skill and our
cunning." Then they began their flight; and the flight of the Monkey-People through
tree-land is one of the things nobody can describe. They have their regular roads and
crossroads, up hills and down hills, all laid out from fifty to seventy or a hundred feet
above ground, and by these they can travel even at night if necessary. Two of the
strongest monkeys caught Mowgli under the arms and swung off with him through the
treetops, twenty feet at a bound. Had they been alone they could have gone twice as fast,
but the boy's weight held them back. Sick and giddy as Mowgli was he could not help
enjoying the wild rush, though the glimpses of earth far down below frightened him, and
the terrible check and jerk at the end of the swing over nothing but empty air brought his
heart between his teeth. His escort would rush him up a tree till he felt the thinnest
topmost branches crackle and bend under them, and then with a cough and a whoop
would fling themselves into the air outward and downward, and bring up, hanging by
their hands or their feet to the lower limbs of the next tree. Sometimes he could see for
miles and miles across the still green jungle, as a man on the top of a mast can see for
miles across the sea, and then the branches and leaves would lash him across the face, and
he and his two guards would be almost down to earth again. So, bounding and crashing
and whooping and yelling, the whole tribe of Bandar-log swept along the tree-roads with
Mowgli their prisoner.

For a time he was afraid of being dropped. Then he grew angry but knew better than to
struggle, and then he began to think. The first thing was to send back word to Baloo and
Bagheera, for, at the pace the monkeys were going, he knew his friends would be left far
behind. It was useless to look down, for he could only see the topsides of the branches, so

he stared upward and saw, far away in the blue, Rann the Kite balancing and wheeling as
he kept watch over the jungle waiting for things to die. Rann saw that the monkeys were
carrying something, and dropped a few hundred yards to find out whether their load was
good to eat. He whistled with surprise when he saw Mowgli being dragged up to a treetop
and heard him give the Kite call for—"We be of one blood, thou and I." The waves of the
branches closed over the boy, but Rann balanced away to the next tree in time to see the
little brown face come up again. "Mark my trail!" Mowgli shouted. "Tell Baloo of the
Seeonee Pack and Bagheera of the Council Rock."

"In whose name, Brother?" Rann had never seen Mowgli before, though of course he had
heard of him.

"Mowgli, the Frog. Man-cub they call me! Mark my trail!"

The last words were shrieked as he was being swung through the air, but Rann nodded
and rose up till he looked no bigger than a speck of dust, and there he hung, watching
with his telescope eyes the swaying of the treetops as Mowgli's escort whirled along.

"They never go far," he said with a chuckle. "They never do what they set out to do.
Always pecking at new things are the Bandar-log. This time, if I have any eye-sight, they
have pecked down trouble for themselves, for Baloo is no fledgling and Bagheera can, as
I know, kill more than goats."

So he rocked on his wings, his feet gathered up under him, and waited.

Meantime, Baloo and Bagheera were furious with rage and grief. Bagheera climbed as he
had never climbed before, but the thin branches broke beneath his weight, and he slipped
down, his claws full of bark.

"Why didst thou not warn the man-cub?" he roared to poor Baloo, who had set off at a
clumsy trot in the hope of overtaking the monkeys. "What was the use of half slaying him
with blows if thou didst not warn him?"

"Haste! O haste! We—we may catch them yet!" Baloo panted.

"At that speed! It would not tire a wounded cow. Teacher of the Law—cub-beater—a
mile of that rolling to and fro would burst thee open. Sit still and think! Make a plan. This
is no time for chasing. They may drop him if we follow too close."

"Arrula! Whoo! They may have dropped him already, being tired of carrying him. Who

can trust the Bandar-log? Put dead bats on my head! Give me black bones to eat! Roll me
into the hives of the wild bees that I may be stung to death, and bury me with the Hyaena,
for I am most miserable of bears! Arulala! Wahooa! O Mowgli, Mowgli! Why did I not
warn thee against the Monkey-Folk instead of breaking thy head? Now perhaps I may
have knocked the day's lesson out of his mind, and he will be alone in the jungle without
the Master Words."

Baloo clasped his paws over his ears and rolled to and fro moaning.

"At least he gave me all the Words correctly a little time ago," said Bagheera impatiently.
"Baloo, thou hast neither memory nor respect. What would the jungle think if I, the Black
Panther, curled myself up like Ikki the Porcupine, and howled?"

"What do I care what the jungle thinks? He may be dead by now."

"Unless and until they drop him from the branches in sport, or kill him out of idleness, I
have no fear for the man-cub. He is wise and well taught, and above all he has the eyes
that make the Jungle-People afraid. But (and it is a great evil) he is in the power of the
Bandar-log, and they, because they live in trees, have no fear of any of our people."
Bagheera licked one forepaw thoughtfully.

"Fool that I am! Oh, fat, brown, root-digging fool that I am," said Baloo, uncoiling
himself with a jerk, "it is true what Hathi the Wild Elephant says: `To each his own fear';
and they, the Bandar-log, fear Kaa the Rock Snake. He can climb as well as they can. He
steals the young monkeys in the night. The whisper of his name makes their wicked tails
cold. Let us go to Kaa."

"What will he do for us? He is not of our tribe, being footless—and with most evil eyes,"
said Bagheera.

"He is very old and very cunning. Above all, he is always hungry," said Baloo hopefully.
"Promise him many goats."

"He sleeps for a full month after he has once eaten. He may be asleep now, and even were
he awake what if he would rather kill his own goats?" Bagheera, who did not know much
about Kaa, was naturally suspicious.

"Then in that case, thou and I together, old hunter, might make him see reason." Here
Baloo rubbed his faded brown shoulder against the Panther, and they went off to look for
Kaa the Rock Python.

They found him stretched out on a warm ledge in the afternoon sun, admiring his
beautiful new coat, for he had been in retirement for the last ten days changing his skin,
and now he was very splendid—darting his big blunt-nosed head along the ground, and
twisting the thirty feet of his body into fantastic knots and curves, and licking his lips as
he thought of his dinner to come.

"He has not eaten," said Baloo, with a grunt of relief, as soon as he saw the beautifully
mottled brown and yellow jacket. "Be careful, Bagheera! He is always a little blind after
he has changed his skin, and very quick to strike."

Kaa was not a poison snake—in fact he rather despised the poison snakes as
cowards—but his strength lay in his hug, and when he had once lapped his huge coils
round anybody there was no more to be said. "Good hunting!" cried Baloo, sitting up on
his haunches. Like all snakes of his breed Kaa was rather deaf, and did not hear the call at
first. Then he curled up ready for any accident, his head lowered.

"Good hunting for us all," he answered. "Oho, Baloo, what dost thou do here? Good
hunting, Bagheera. One of us at least needs food. Is there any news of game afoot? A doe
now, or even a young buck? I am as empty as a dried well."

"We are hunting," said Baloo carelessly. He knew that you must not hurry Kaa. He is too
big.

"Give me permission to come with you," said Kaa. "A blow more or less is nothing to
thee, Bagheera or Baloo, but I—I have to wait and wait for days in a wood-path and climb
half a night on the mere chance of a young ape. Psshaw! The branches are not what they
were when I was young. Rotten twigs and dry boughs are they all."

"Maybe thy great weight has something to do with the matter," said Baloo.

"I am a fair length—a fair length," said Kaa with a little pride. "But for all that, it is the
fault of this new-grown timber. I came very near to falling on my last hunt—very near
indeed—and the noise of my slipping, for my tail was not tight wrapped around the tree,
waked the Bandar-log, and they called me most evil names."

"Footless, yellow earth-worm," said Bagheera under his whiskers, as though he were
trying to remember something.

"Sssss! Have they ever called me that?" said Kaa.

"Something of that kind it was that they shouted to us last moon, but we never noticed
them. They will say anything—even that thou hast lost all thy teeth, and wilt not face
anything bigger than a kid, because (they are indeed shameless, these
Bandar-log)—because thou art afraid of the he-goat's horns," Bagheera went on sweetly.

Now a snake, especially a wary old python like Kaa, very seldom shows that he is angry,
but Baloo and Bagheera could see the big swallowing muscles on either side of Kaa's
throat ripple and bulge.

"The Bandar-log have shifted their grounds," he said quietly. "When I came up into the
sun today I heard them whooping among the tree-tops."

"It—it is the Bandar-log that we follow now," said Baloo, but the words stuck in his
throat, for that was the first time in his memory that one of the Jungle-People had owned
to being interested in the doings of the monkeys.

"Beyond doubt then it is no small thing that takes two such hunters—leaders in their own
jungle I am certain—on the trail of the Bandar-log," Kaa replied courteously, as he
swelled with curiosity.

"Indeed," Baloo began, "I am no more than the old and sometimes very foolish Teacher of
the Law to the Seeonee wolf-cubs, and Bagheera here—"

"Is Bagheera," said the Black Panther, and his jaws shut with a snap, for he did not
believe in being humble. "The trouble is this, Kaa. Those nut-stealers and pickers of palm
leaves have stolen away our man-cub of whom thou hast perhaps heard."

"I heard some news from Ikki (his quills make him presumptuous) of a man-thing that
was entered into a wolf pack, but I did not believe. Ikki is full of stories half heard and
very badly told."

"But it is true. He is such a man-cub as never was," said Baloo. "The best and wisest and
boldest of man-cubs—my own pupil, who shall make the name of Baloo famous through
all the jungles; and besides, I—we—love him, Kaa."

"Ts! Ts!" said Kaa, weaving his head to and fro. "I also have known what love is. There
are tales I could tell that—"

"That need a clear night when we are all well fed to praise properly," said Bagheera
quickly. "Our man-cub is in the hands of the Bandar-log now, and we know that of all the

Jungle-People they fear Kaa alone."

"They fear me alone. They have good reason," said Kaa. "Chattering, foolish, vain—vain,
foolish, and chattering, are the monkeys. But a man-thing in their hands is in no good
luck. They grow tired of the nuts they pick, and throw them down. They carry a branch
half a day, meaning to do great things with it, and then they snap it in two. That
man-thing is not to be envied. They called me also—`yellow fish' was it not?"

"Worm—worm—earth-worm," said Bagheera, "as well as other things which I cannot
now say for shame."

"We must remind them to speak well of their master. Aaa-ssp! We must help their
wandering memories. Now, whither went they with the cub?"

"The jungle alone knows. Toward the sunset, I believe," said Baloo. "We had thought that
thou wouldst know, Kaa."

"I? How? I take them when they come in my way, but I do not hunt the Bandar-log, or
frogs—or green scum on a water-hole, for that matter."

"Up, Up! Up, Up! Hillo! Illo! Illo, look up, Baloo of the Seeonee Wolf Pack!"

Baloo looked up to see where the voice came from, and there was Rann the Kite,
sweeping down with the sun shining on the upturned flanges of his wings. It was near
Rann's bedtime, but he had ranged all over the jungle looking for the Bear and had missed
him in the thick foliage.

"What is it?" said Baloo.

"I have seen Mowgli among the Bandar-log. He bade me tell you. I watched. The
Bandar-log have taken him beyond the river to the monkey city—to the Cold Lairs. They
may stay there for a night, or ten nights, or an hour. I have told the bats to watch through
the dark time. That is my message. Good hunting, all you below!"

"Full gorge and a deep sleep to you, Rann," cried Bagheera. "I will remember thee in my
next kill, and put aside the head for thee alone, O best of kites!"

"It is nothing. It is nothing. The boy held the Master Word. I could have done no less,"
and Rann circled up again to his roost.

"He has not forgotten to use his tongue," said Baloo with a chuckle of pride. "To think of
one so young remembering the Master Word for the birds too while he was being pulled
across trees!"

"It was most firmly driven into him," said Bagheera. "But I am proud of him, and now we
must go to the Cold Lairs."

They all knew where that place was, but few of the Jungle People ever went there,
because what they called the Cold Lairs was an old deserted city, lost and buried in the
jungle, and beasts seldom use a place that men have once used. The wild boar will, but
the hunting tribes do not. Besides, the monkeys lived there as much as they could be said
to live anywhere, and no self-respecting animal would come within eyeshot of it except in
times of drought, when the half-ruined tanks and reservoirs held a little water.

"It is half a night's journey—at full speed," said Bagheera, and Baloo looked very serious.
"I will go as fast as I can," he said anxiously.

"We dare not wait for thee. Follow, Baloo. We must go on the quick-foot—Kaa and I."

"Feet or no feet, I can keep abreast of all thy four," said Kaa shortly. Baloo made one
effort to hurry, but had to sit down panting, and so they left him to come on later, while
Bagheera hurried forward, at the quick panther-canter. Kaa said nothing, but, strive as
Bagheera might, the huge Rock-python held level with him. When they came to a hill
stream, Bagheera gained, because he bounded across while Kaa swam, his head and two
feet of his neck clearing the water, but on level ground Kaa made up the distance.

"By the Broken Lock that freed me," said Bagheera, when twilight had fallen, "thou art no
slow goer!"

"I am hungry," said Kaa. "Besides, they called me speckled frog."

"Worm—earth-worm, and yellow to boot."

"All one. Let us go on," and Kaa seemed to pour himself along the ground, finding the
shortest road with his steady eyes, and keeping to it.

In the Cold Lairs the Monkey-People were not thinking of Mowgli's friends at all. They
had brought the boy to the Lost City, and were very much pleased with themselves for the
time. Mowgli had never seen an Indian city before, and though this was almost a heap of
ruins it seemed very wonderful and splendid. Some king had built it long ago on a little

hill. You could still trace the stone causeways that led up to the ruined gates where the
last splinters of wood hung to the worn, rusted hinges. Trees had grown into and out of
the walls; the battlements were tumbled down and decayed, and wild creepers hung out of
the windows of the towers on the walls in bushy hanging clumps.

A great roofless palace crowned the hill, and the marble of the courtyards and the
fountains was split, and stained with red and green, and the very cobblestones in the
courtyard where the king's elephants used to live had been thrust up and apart by grasses
and young trees. From the palace you could see the rows and rows of roofless houses that
made up the city looking like empty honeycombs filled with blackness; the shapeless
block of stone that had been an idol in the square where four roads met; the pits and
dimples at street corners where the public wells once stood, and the shattered domes of
temples with wild figs sprouting on their sides. The monkeys called the place their city,
and pretended to despise the Jungle-People because they lived in the forest. And yet they
never knew what the buildings were made for nor how to use them. They would sit in
circles on the hall of the king's council chamber, and scratch for fleas and pretend to be
men; or they would run in and out of the roofless houses and collect pieces of plaster and
old bricks in a corner, and forget where they had hidden them, and fight and cry in
scuffling crowds, and then break off to play up and down the terraces of the king's
garden, where they would shake the rose trees and the oranges in sport to see the fruit and
flowers fall. They explored all the passages and dark tunnels in the palace and the
hundreds of little dark rooms, but they never remembered what they had seen and what
they had not; and so drifted about in ones and twos or crowds telling each other that they
were doing as men did. They drank at the tanks and made the water all muddy, and then
they fought over it, and then they would all rush together in mobs and shout: "There is no
one in the jungle so wise and good and clever and strong and gentle as the Bandar-log."
Then all would begin again till they grew tired of the city and went back to the tree-tops,
hoping the Jungle-People would notice them.

Mowgli, who had been trained under the Law of the Jungle, did not like or understand
this kind of life. The monkeys dragged him into the Cold Lairs late in the afternoon, and
instead of going to sleep, as Mowgli would have done after a long journey, they joined
hands and danced about and sang their foolish songs. One of the monkeys made a speech
and told his companions that Mowgli's capture marked a new thing in the history of the
Bandar-log, for Mowgli was going to show them how to weave sticks and canes together
as a protection against rain and cold. Mowgli picked up some creepers and began to work
them in and out, and the monkeys tried to imitate; but in a very few minutes they lost
interest and began to pull their friends' tails or jump up and down on all fours, coughing.

"I wish to eat," said Mowgli. "I am a stranger in this part of the jungle. Bring me food, or

give me leave to hunt here."

Twenty or thirty monkeys bounded away to bring him nuts and wild pawpaws. But they
fell to fighting on the road, and it was too much trouble to go back with what was left of
the fruit. Mowgli was sore and angry as well as hungry, and he roamed through the empty
city giving the Strangers' Hunting Call from time to time, but no one answered him, and
Mowgli felt that he had reached a very bad place indeed. "All that Baloo has said about
the Bandar-log is true," he thought to himself. "They have no Law, no Hunting Call, and
no leaders—nothing but foolish words and little picking thievish hands. So if I am starved
or killed here, it will be all my own fault. But I must try to return to my own jungle. Baloo
will surely beat me, but that is better than chasing silly rose leaves with the Bandar-log."

No sooner had he walked to the city wall than the monkeys pulled him back, telling him
that he did not know how happy he was, and pinching him to make him grateful. He set
his teeth and said nothing, but went with the shouting monkeys to a terrace above the red
sandstone reservoirs that were half-full of rain water. There was a ruined summer-house
of white marble in the center of the terrace, built for queens dead a hundred years ago.
The domed roof had half fallen in and blocked up the underground passage from the
palace by which the queens used to enter. But the walls were made of screens of marble
tracery—beautiful milk-white fretwork, set with agates and cornelians and jasper and
lapis lazuli, and as the moon came up behind the hill it shone through the open work,
casting shadows on the ground like black velvet embroidery. Sore, sleepy, and hungry as
he was, Mowgli could not help laughing when the Bandar-log began, twenty at a time, to
tell him how great and wise and strong and gentle they were, and how foolish he was to
wish to leave them. "We are great. We are free. We are wonderful. We are the most
wonderful people in all the jungle! We all say so, and so it must be true," they shouted.
"Now as you are a new listener and can carry our words back to the Jungle-People so that
they may notice us in future, we will tell you all about our most excellent selves." Mowgli
made no objection, and the monkeys gathered by hundreds and hundreds on the terrace to
listen to their own speakers singing the praises of the Bandar-log, and whenever a speaker
stopped for want of breath they would all shout together: "This is true; we all say so."
Mowgli nodded and blinked, and said "Yes" when they asked him a question, and his
head spun with the noise. "Tabaqui the Jackal must have bitten all these people," he said
to himself, "and now they have madness. Certainly this is dewanee, the madness. Do they
never go to sleep? Now there is a cloud coming to cover that moon. If it were only a big
enough cloud I might try to run away in the darkness. But I am tired."

That same cloud was being watched by two good friends in the ruined ditch below the
city wall, for Bagheera and Kaa, knowing well how dangerous the Monkey-People were
in large numbers, did not wish to run any risks. The monkeys never fight unless they are a

hundred to one, and few in the jungle care for those odds.

"I will go to the west wall," Kaa whispered, "and come down swiftly with the slope of the
ground in my favor. They will not throw themselves upon my back in their hundreds,
but—"

"I know it," said Bagheera. "Would that Baloo were here, but we must do what we can.
When that cloud covers the moon I shall go to the terrace. They hold some sort of council
there over the boy."

"Good hunting," said Kaa grimly, and glided away to the west wall. That happened to be
the least ruined of any, and the big snake was delayed awhile before he could find a way
up the stones. The cloud hid the moon, and as Mowgli wondered what would come next
he heard Bagheera's light feet on the terrace. The Black Panther had raced up the slope
almost without a sound and was striking—he knew better than to waste time in
biting—right and left among the monkeys, who were seated round Mowgli in circles fifty
and sixty deep. There was a howl of fright and rage, and then as Bagheera tripped on the
rolling kicking bodies beneath him, a monkey shouted: "There is only one here! Kill him!
Kill." A scuffling mass of monkeys, biting, scratching, tearing, and pulling, closed over
Bagheera, while five or six laid hold of Mowgli, dragged him up the wall of the
summerhouse and pushed him through the hole of the broken dome. A man-trained boy
would have been badly bruised, for the fall was a good fifteen feet, but Mowgli fell as
Baloo had taught him to fall, and landed on his feet.

"Stay there," shouted the monkeys, "till we have killed thy friends, and later we will play
with thee—if the Poison-People leave thee alive."

"We be of one blood, ye and I," said Mowgli, quickly giving the Snake's Call. He could
hear rustling and hissing in the rubbish all round him and gave the Call a second time, to
make sure.

"Even ssso! Down hoods all!" said half a dozen low voices (every ruin in India becomes
sooner or later a dwelling place of snakes, and the old summerhouse was alive with
cobras). "Stand still, Little Brother, for thy feet may do us harm."

Mowgli stood as quietly as he could, peering through the open work and listening to the
furious din of the fight round the Black Panther—the yells and chatterings and scufflings,
and Bagheera's deep, hoarse cough as he backed and bucked and twisted and plunged
under the heaps of his enemies. For the first time since he was born, Bagheera was
fighting for his life.

"Baloo must be at hand; Bagheera would not have come alone," Mowgli thought. And
then he called aloud: "To the tank, Bagheera. Roll to the water tanks. Roll and plunge!
Get to the water!"

Bagheera heard, and the cry that told him Mowgli was safe gave him new courage. He
worked his way desperately, inch by inch, straight for the reservoirs, halting in silence.
Then from the ruined wall nearest the jungle rose up the rumbling war-shout of Baloo.
The old Bear had done his best, but he could not come before. "Bagheera," he shouted, "I
am here. I climb! I haste! Ahuwora! The stones slip under my feet! Wait my coming, O
most infamous Bandar-log!" He panted up the terrace only to disappear to the head in a
wave of monkeys, but he threw himself squarely on his haunches, and, spreading out his
forepaws, hugged as many as he could hold, and then began to hit with a regular
bat-bat-bat, like the flipping strokes of a paddle wheel. A crash and a splash told Mowgli
that Bagheera had fought his way to the tank where the monkeys could not follow. The
Panther lay gasping for breath, his head just out of the water, while the monkeys stood
three deep on the red steps, dancing up and down with rage, ready to spring upon him
from all sides if he came out to help Baloo. It was then that Bagheera lifted up his
dripping chin, and in despair gave the Snake's Call for protection—"We be of one blood,
ye and I"—for he believed that Kaa had turned tail at the last minute. Even Baloo, half
smothered under the monkeys on the edge of the terrace, could not help chuckling as he
heard the Black Panther asking for help.

Kaa had only just worked his way over the west wall, landing with a wrench that
dislodged a coping stone into the ditch. He had no intention of losing any advantage of
the ground, and coiled and uncoiled himself once or twice, to be sure that every foot of
his long body was in working order. All that while the fight with Baloo went on, and the
monkeys yelled in the tank round Bagheera, and Mang the Bat, flying to and fro, carried
the news of the great battle over the jungle, till even Hathi the Wild Elephant trumpeted,
and, far away, scattered bands of the Monkey-Folk woke and came leaping along the
tree-roads to help their comrades in the Cold Lairs, and the noise of the fight roused all
the day birds for miles round. Then Kaa came straight, quickly, and anxious to kill. The
fighting strength of a python is in the driving blow of his head backed by all the strength
and weight of his body. If you can imagine a lance, or a battering ram, or a hammer
weighing nearly half a ton driven by a cool, quiet mind living in the handle of it, you can
roughly imagine what Kaa was like when he fought. A python four or five feet long can
knock a man down if he hits him fairly in the chest, and Kaa was thirty feet long, as you
know. His first stroke was delivered into the heart of the crowd round Baloo. It was sent
home with shut mouth in silence, and there was no need of a second. The monkeys
scattered with cries of—"Kaa! It is Kaa! Run! Run!"

Generations of monkeys had been scared into good behavior by the stories their elders
told them of Kaa, the night thief, who could slip along the branches as quietly as moss
grows, and steal away the strongest monkey that ever lived; of old Kaa, who could make
himself look so like a dead branch or a rotten stump that the wisest were deceived, till the
branch caught them. Kaa was everything that the monkeys feared in the jungle, for none
of them knew the limits of his power, none of them could look him in the face, and none
had ever come alive out of his hug. And so they ran, stammering with terror, to the walls
and the roofs of the houses, and Baloo drew a deep breath of relief. His fur was much
thicker than Bagheera's, but he had suffered sorely in the fight. Then Kaa opened his
mouth for the first time and spoke one long hissing word, and the far-away monkeys,
hurrying to the defense of the Cold Lairs, stayed where they were, cowering, till the
loaded branches bent and crackled under them. The monkeys on the walls and the empty
houses stopped their cries, and in the stillness that fell upon the city Mowgli heard
Bagheera shaking his wet sides as he came up from the tank. Then the clamor broke out
again. The monkeys leaped higher up the walls. They clung around the necks of the big
stone idols and shrieked as they skipped along the battlements, while Mowgli, dancing in
the summerhouse, put his eye to the screenwork and hooted owl-fashion between his front
teeth, to show his derision and contempt.

"Get the man-cub out of that trap; I can do no more," Bagheera gasped. "Let us take the
man-cub and go. They may attack again."

"They will not move till I order them. Stay you sssso!" Kaa hissed, and the city was silent
once more. "I could not come before, Brother, but I think I heard thee call"—this was to
Bagheera.

"I—I may have cried out in the battle," Bagheera answered. "Baloo, art thou hurt?

"I am not sure that they did not pull me into a hundred little bearlings," said Baloo,
gravely shaking one leg after the other. "Wow! I am sore. Kaa, we owe thee, I think, our
lives—Bagheera and I."

"No matter. Where is the manling?"

"Here, in a trap. I cannot climb out," cried Mowgli. The curve of the broken dome was
above his head.

"Take him away. He dances like Mao the Peacock. He will crush our young," said the
cobras inside.

"Hah!" said Kaa with a chuckle, "he has friends everywhere, this manling. Stand back,
manling. And hide you, O Poison People. I break down the wall."

Kaa looked carefully till he found a discolored crack in the marble tracery showing a
weak spot, made two or three light taps with his head to get the distance, and then lifting
up six feet of his body clear of the ground, sent home half a dozen full-power smashing
blows, nose-first. The screen-work broke and fell away in a cloud of dust and rubbish,
and Mowgli leaped through the opening and flung himself between Baloo and
Bagheera—an arm around each big neck.

"Art thou hurt?" said Baloo, hugging him softly.

"I am sore, hungry, and not a little bruised. But, oh, they have handled ye grievously, my
Brothers! Ye bleed."

"Others also," said Bagheera, licking his lips and looking at the monkey-dead on the
terrace and round the tank.

"It is nothing, it is nothing, if thou art safe, oh, my pride of all little frogs!" whimpered
Baloo.

"Of that we shall judge later," said Bagheera, in a dry voice that Mowgli did not at all
like. "But here is Kaa to whom we owe the battle and thou owest thy life. Thank him
according to our customs, Mowgli."

Mowgli turned and saw the great Python's head swaying a foot above his own.

"So this is the manling," said Kaa. "Very soft is his skin, and he is not unlike the
Bandar-log. Have a care, manling, that I do not mistake thee for a monkey some twilight
when I have newly changed my coat."

"We be one blood, thou and I," Mowgli answered. "I take my life from thee tonight. My
kill shall be thy kill if ever thou art hungry, O Kaa."

"All thanks, Little Brother," said Kaa, though his eyes twinkled. "And what may so bold a
hunter kill? I ask that I may follow when next he goes abroad."

"I kill nothing,—I am too little,—but I drive goats toward such as can use them. When
thou art empty come to me and see if I speak the truth. I have some skill in these [he held
out his hands], and if ever thou art in a trap, I may pay the debt which I owe to thee, to

Bagheera, and to Baloo, here. Good hunting to ye all, my masters."

"Well said," growled Baloo, for Mowgli had returned thanks very prettily. The Python
dropped his head lightly for a minute on Mowgli's shoulder. "A brave heart and a
courteous tongue," said he. "They shall carry thee far through the jungle, manling. But
now go hence quickly with thy friends. Go and sleep, for the moon sets, and what follows
it is not well that thou shouldst see."

The moon was sinking behind the hills and the lines of trembling monkeys huddled
together on the walls and battlements looked like ragged shaky fringes of things. Baloo
went down to the tank for a drink and Bagheera began to put his fur in order, as Kaa
glided out into the center of the terrace and brought his jaws together with a ringing snap
that drew all the monkeys' eyes upon him.

"The moon sets," he said. "Is there yet light enough to see?"

From the walls came a moan like the wind in the tree-tops—"We see, O Kaa."

"Good. Begins now the dance—the Dance of the Hunger of Kaa. Sit still and watch."

He turned twice or thrice in a big circle, weaving his head from right to left. Then he
began making loops and figures of eight with his body, and soft, oozy triangles that
melted into squares and five-sided figures, and coiled mounds, never resting, never
hurrying, and never stopping his low humming song. It grew darker and darker, till at last
the dragging, shifting coils disappeared, but they could hear the rustle of the scales.

Baloo and Bagheera stood still as stone, growling in their throats, their neck hair bristling,
and Mowgli watched and wondered.

"Bandar-log," said the voice of Kaa at last, "can ye stir foot or hand without my order?
Speak!"

"Without thy order we cannot stir foot or hand, O Kaa!"

"Good! Come all one pace nearer to me."

The lines of the monkeys swayed forward helplessly, and Baloo and Bagheera took one
stiff step forward with them.

"Nearer!" hissed Kaa, and they all moved again.

Mowgli laid his hands on Baloo and Bagheera to get them away, and the two great beasts
started as though they had been waked from a dream.

"Keep thy hand on my shoulder," Bagheera whispered. "Keep it there, or I must go
back—must go back to Kaa. Aah!"

"It is only old Kaa making circles on the dust," said Mowgli. "Let us go." And the three
slipped off through a gap in the walls to the jungle.

"Whoof!" said Baloo, when he stood under the still trees again. "Never more will I make
an ally of Kaa," and he shook himself all over.

"He knows more than we," said Bagheera, trembling. "In a little time, had I stayed, I
should have walked down his throat."

"Many will walk by that road before the moon rises again," said Baloo. "He will have
good hunting—after his own fashion."

"But what was the meaning of it all?" said Mowgli, who did not know anything of a
python's powers of fascination. "I saw no more than a big snake making foolish circles till
the dark came. And his nose was all sore. Ho! Ho!"

"Mowgli," said Bagheera angrily, "his nose was sore on thy account, as my ears and sides
and paws, and Baloo's neck and shoulders are bitten on thy account. Neither Baloo nor
Bagheera will be able to hunt with pleasure for many days."

"It is nothing," said Baloo; "we have the man-cub again."

"True, but he has cost us heavily in time which might have been spent in good hunting, in
wounds, in hair—I am half plucked along my back—and last of all, in honor. For,
remember, Mowgli, I, who am the Black Panther, was forced to call upon Kaa for
protection, and Baloo and I were both made stupid as little birds by the Hunger Dance.
All this, man-cub, came of thy playing with the Bandar-log."

"True, it is true," said Mowgli sorrowfully. "I am an evil man-cub, and my stomach is sad
in me."

"Mf! What says the Law of the Jungle, Baloo?"

Baloo did not wish to bring Mowgli into any more trouble, but he could not tamper with

the Law, so he mumbled: "Sorrow never stays punishment. But remember, Bagheera, he
is very little."

"I will remember. But he has done mischief, and blows must be dealt now. Mowgli, hast
thou anything to say?"

"Nothing. I did wrong. Baloo and thou are wounded. It is just."

Bagheera gave him half a dozen love-taps from a panther's point of view (they would
hardly have waked one of his own cubs), but for a seven-year-old boy they amounted to
as severe a beating as you could wish to avoid. When it was all over Mowgli sneezed, and
picked himself up without a word.

"Now," said Bagheera, "jump on my back, Little Brother, and we will go home."

One of the beauties of Jungle Law is that punishment settles all scores. There is no
nagging afterward.

Mowgli laid his head down on Bagheera's back and slept so deeply that he never waked
when he was put down in the home-cave. 

Section 5

The Gods of the Copybook Headings

(1919)

AS I PASS through my incarnations in every age and race,
I make my proper prostrations to the Gods of the Market Place.
Peering through reverent fingers I watch them flourish and fall,
And the Gods of the Copybook Headings, I notice, outlast them all.

We were living in trees when they met us. They showed us each in turn
That Water would certainly wet us, as Fire would certainly burn:
But we found them lacking in Uplift, Vision and Breadth of Mind,
So we left them to teach the Gorillas while we followed the March of Mankind.

We moved as the Spirit listed. They never altered their pace,
Being neither cloud nor wind-borne like the Gods of the Market Place,
But they always caught up with our progress, and presently word would come
That a tribe had been wiped off its icefield, or the lights had gone out in Rome.

With the Hopes that our World is built on they were utterly out of touch,
They denied that the Moon was Stilton; they denied she was even Dutch;
They denied that Wishes were Horses; they denied that a Pig had Wings;
So we worshipped the Gods of the Market Who promised these beautiful things.

When the Cambrian measures were forming, They promised perpetual peace.
They swore, if we gave them our weapons, that the wars of the tribes would cease.
But when we disarmed They sold us and delivered us bound to our foe,
And the Gods of the Copybook Headings said: "Stick to the Devil you know."

On the first Feminian Sandstones we were promised the Fuller Life
(Which started by loving our neighbour and ended by loving his wife)
Till our women had no more children and the men lost reason and faith,
And the Gods of the Copybook Headings said: "The Wages of Sin is Death."

In the Carboniferous Epoch we were promised abundance for all,
By robbing selected Peter to pay for collective Paul;
But, though we had plenty of money, there was nothing our money could buy,
And the Gods of the Copybook Headings said: "If you don't work you die."

Then the Gods of the Market tumbled, and their smooth-tongued wizards withdrew
And the hearts of the meanest were humbled and began to believe it was true
That All is not Gold that Glitters, and Two and Two make Four
And the Gods of the Copybook Headings limped up to explain it once more.

As it will be in the future, it was at the birth of Man
There are only four things certain since Social Progress began.
That the Dog returns to his Vomit and the Sow returns to her Mire,
And the burnt Fool's bandaged finger goes wabbling back to the Fire;

And that after this is accomplished, and the brave new world begins
When all men are paid for existing and no man must pay for his sins,
As surely as Water will wet us, as surely as Fire will burn,
The Gods of the Copybook Headings with terror and slaughter return!

