Title: The fountains of paradise

Author: Arthur C. Clarke

Original copyright year: 1979

Genre: science fiction

Book price (of scanned edition): unknown

Comments: to my knowledge, this is the only available e-text of this book

Source: scanned and OCR-read from a hardback edition with Xerox
TextBridge Pro 9.0, proofread in MS Word 2000.

Date of e-text: August 1, 1999

Prepared by: Anada Sucka

LESLIE EKANAYAKE (13 JuIy 1947 - 4 July 1977)

only perfect friend of a lifetime, in whom were uniquely combined Loyalty,
Intelligence and Compassion.

When your radiant and loving spirit vanished from this world, the light went
out of many lives.

NIRVANA PRAPTO BHUYAT

Sri Jawaharlal Nehru, to the Ceylon Association for the Advancement of
Science, Colombo, 15 October 1962.

 Foreword

  1. Kalidasa

  2. Thc Engineer

  3. The Fountains

  4. Demon Rock

  5. Through the Telescope

  6. The Artist

  7. The God-King's Palace

  8. Malgara

  9. Filament

 10. The Ultimate Bridge

 11. The Silent Princess

 12. Starglider

 13. Shadow at Dawn

 14. The Education of Starglider

 15. Bodhidharma

 16. Conversations with Starglider

 17. Parakarma

 18. The Golden Butterflies

 19. By the Shores of Lake Saladin

 20. The Bridge that Danced

 21. Judgement

 22. Apostate

 23. Moondozer

 24. The Finger of God

 25. Orbital Roulette

 26. The Night Before Vesak

 27. Ashoka Station

 28. The First Lowering

 29. Final Approach

 30. The Legions of the King

 31. Exodus

 32. Space Express

 33. CORA

 34. Vertigo

 35. Starglider Plus Eighty

 36. The Cruel Sky

 37. The Billion-Ton Diamond

 38. A Place of Silent Storms

 39. The Wounded Sun

 40. The End of the Line

 41. Meteor

 42. Death in Orbit

 43. Fail-Safe

 44. A Cave in the Sky

 45. The Man for the Job

 46. Spider

 47. Beyond the Aurora

 48. Night at the Villa

 49. A Bumpy Ride

 50. The Falling Fireflies

 51. On the Porch

 52. The Other Passenger

 53. Fade-out

 54. Theory of Relativity

 55. Hard Dock

 56. View from the Balcony

 57. The Last Dawn

 58. Epilogue: Kalidasa's Triumph

    Traditional: reported by Friar Marignolli (A.D. 1335)

    And utmost Indian Isle Taprobane...

    I - THE PALACE

could already see the armies of his half-brother, returning to claim the blood-
stained throne of Taprobane. But that threat was still far off, across monsoon-
riven seas; although Kalidasa put more trust in his spies than his astrologers,
it was comforting to know that they agreed on this.

saw their torches marking a thin line of fire up the face of the mountain. The
humblest beggar could greet that holy dawn and receive the blessings of the
gods; the ruler of all this land could not.

Kalidasa's folly, except for a faint line that hinted at the outer rampart of the
Pleasure Gardens. Yet once it had been experienced, such was the impact of
Demon Rock that it was impossible to forget. The Mahanayake Thero could
see in imagination, as clearly as if he stood between them, the immense lion's
claws protruding from the sheer face of the cliff - while overhead loomed the
battlements upon which, it was easy to believe, the accursed King still
walked.

    As his eye traced the slowly dissolving vapour trail across the sky,
Bodhidharma Mahanayake Thero - eighty-fifth of his name - had a sudden
and most un-monkish fantasy. Kalidasa would have had a suitable treatment
for space-line operators who thought only of dollars per kilo to orbit...
something that probably involved impalement, or metal-shod elephants, or
boiling oil.

bullet.

The water still flowed in the original stone conduits; nothing had been
changed, except that the cisterns high up on the rock were now filled by
electric pumps, not relays of sweating slaves.

justice; he should have been a romantic poet, or a concert pianist - or,
perhaps, a great actor, holding thousands spell-bound by his skill. Rajasinghe
knew power when he saw it, for power had been his business; and it was
power that he was facing now. Beware of small men, he had often told
himself - for they are the movers and shakers of the world.

the world. In a mood of ecological euphoria, TCC had proposed demolishing
the last remaining section of the pipeline and restoring the land to the
penguins. Instantly there had been cries of protest from the industrial
archaeologists, outraged at such vandalism, and from the naturalists, who
pointed out that the penguins simply loved the abandoned pipeline. It had
provided housing of a standard they had never before enjoyed, and thus
contributed to a population explosion that the killer whales could barely
handle. So TCC had surrendered without a fight.

    "Not at all; my time is my own. You've eaten, I hope?"

    Rajasinghe had no intention of offending his visitor, but there was no
mistaking Morgan's brief flash of irritation. The ex-diplomat's instincts
automatically came into play; he filed the reaction for future reference.

    3. The Fountains

them, created a rainbow-hued mist that added to the strangeness and beauty of
the scene. Never, in the whole history of Taprobane, had the eyes of men
witnessed such a wonder.

    "Yet in the early years of their boyhood Kalidasa and his half-brother
Malgara were the closest of friends. They grew up together quite unconscious
of their rival destinies, and the intrigues that festered around them. The first
cause of trouble had nothing to do with the accident of birth; it was only a
well-intentioned, innocent gift."

monkey-god of the Ramayana. The King's jeweller constructed a small
golden cart, in which Hanuman would sit solemnly while he was drawn
through the court, to the amusement and delight of all who watched."

superstructure had vanished.

to the water's edge, hoping that it would fall on land; but the wind would not
listen to the prayers of a little boy.

all the way - the sort of detail that must be true, because no historian would
have bothered to invent it.

fear of the next world, and of his brother". Sooner or later, Malgara would
return to seek his rightful throne.

battlements and spires, clinging to its entire upper surface. It was impossible
to see them clearly; they remained tantalisingly out of focus, like the images
in a dream.

    "Kalidasa was found on the battlefield, dead by his own hand. Malgara
became king. And Yakkagala was abandoned to the jungle, not to be
discovered again for seventeen hundred years."

Taprobani lay a thousand years in their future.

    The Chief Designer of the proposed Gibraltar Bridge had announced a
startling innovation. As all vehicles would be on automatic guidance, there
was absolutely no point in having parapets or guard rails at the edge of the
roadway; eliminating them would save thousands of tons. Of course,
everyone thought that this was a perfectly horrible idea; what would happen,
the public demanded, if some car's guidance failed, and the vehicle headed
towards the edge? The Chief Designer had the answers; unfortunately, he had
rather too many.

    Was he planning to build something here? Not that it would be allowed, of
course, and Rajasinghe could imagine no conceivable attractions for such a
site; megalomaniac kings were fortunately now in short supply. In any event,
he was quite certain, from the engineer's reactions on the previous evening,
that Morgan had never heard of Yakkagala before coming to Taprobane.

the contrary, he was a god at last.

    "I would like your Majesty's permission to return to Ishfahan, so that I may
see my own people once again."

    To Kalidasa's surprise, Firdaz no longer looked so uncertain; it was almost
as if he had made some great decision, and was finally at ease.

servants to take care of him for the remainder of his life. He would never have
needed to use his hands again; and after a while he would not have missed
them.

flown his lost kite in Kiribilli Park, beside the granite monoliths that had once
been the piers of the long-demolished Sydney Harbour Bridge.

Did the people who built this extraordinary place really have such tiny feet,
he wondered? Or was it a clever ruse of the architect, to discourage unfriendly
visitors? It would certainly be difficult for soldiers to charge up this sixty-
degree slope, on steps that seemed to have been made for midgets.

of Yakkagala. It was not how the frescoes were painted - a scaffolding of
bamboo could have taken care of that problem - but why. Once they were
completed, no-one could ever have seen them properly; from the gallery
immediately beneath, they were hopelessly foreshortened - and from the base
of the Rock they would have been no more than tiny, unrecognisable patches
of colour. Perhaps, as some had suggested, they were of purely religious or
magical significance - like those Stone Age paintings found in the depths of
almost inaccessible caves.

    He savoured the phrase in his mind; the Fountains of Paradise. Was
Kalidasa trying to create, here on earth, a garden fit for the gods, in order to
establish his claim to divinity? If so, it was no wonder that the priests had
accused him of blasphemy, and placed a curse upon all his work.

of horizontal slots and narrow ledges that had once supported the foundations
of vanished masonry.

rider, perched just behind the enormous ears. And a stream of tourists was
pouring like army ants through the Pleasure Gardens from the general
direction of the Hotel Yakkagala; he would not enjoy his solitude much
longer.

    But man-made obstacles had never stopped him before. Nature was his real
antagonist-the friendly enemy who never cheated and always played fair, yet
never failed to take advantage of the tiniest oversight or omission. And all the
forces of Nature were epitomised for him now in the distant blue cone which
he knew so well, but had yet to feel beneath his feet.

Malgara's face when, for the last time, he gazed upon the brother who had
shared his boyhood. The battlefield was quiet now; even the cries of the
injured had been silenced by healing herb or yet more potent sword.

    From the heart of the Pleasure Gardens which had given him such delight,
the smoke of Kalidasa's funeral pyre rose into the cloudless sky, disturbing the
birds of prey who had gathered from far and wide. Grimly content, though
sometimes haunted by sudden memories, Malgara watched the symbol of his
triumph spiralling upwards, announcing to all the land that the new reign had
begun.

    "You nearly gave me a heart attack," said Rajasinghe accusingly, as he
poured the morning coffee. "At first I thought you had some anti-gravity
device - but even I know that's impossible. How did you do it?"

couple of hundred kilos, and I'm always finding new uses for it. Today's little
exploit wasn't the first, by any means."

would instantly recognise Maxine Duval, either by sight or by sound.

sometimes forget there's a real world out there, occupied by about five
thousand dear friends and fifty million intimate acquaintances."

    "Sorry about the race," said Rajasinghe, "but I note that Marlin III won
very handily without you. I think you'll admit that this is rather more
important... But let Morgan speak for himself."

anyone took Yuri Artsutanov seriously. It has taken two centuries for our
technology to match his vision."

strength. On a microscopic scale, materials had been created in the laboratory
with far greater breaking strength. If they could be mass-produced,
Artsutanov's dream could become reality, and the economics of space
transportation would be utterly transformed.

    The descending line of light reached the equator; at the same moment, the
outward extension also ceased.

admire him more and more. But now he's come up against an obstacle he
doesn't know how to handle. He only discovered it a few days ago, and it's
stopped him dead in his tracks."

them. I'm going up the Rock."

complete the sentence.

at reading archaic Taprobani inscriptions. They had both been young men
when Paul had begun his life's work. Rajasinghe could remember standing at
this very spot while the then Deputy Assistant Epigrapher of the Department
of Archaeology had traced out the almost indecipherable marks on the yellow
plaster, and translated the poems addressed to the beauties on the rock above.
After all these centuries, the lines could still strike echoes in the human heart:

king's heavenly court. Rajasinghe greeted them silently, then sank gratefully
into the chair that was offered by the official guide.

to hinder. I still have many friends; if I wish, I can delay this dream - or
nightmare - at least beyond my lifetime. Should I do so? Or should I give aid
to this man, whatever his real motives may be?"

    II - THE TEMPLE

    El Hadj Mohammed ben Selim, Professor of Comparative Religion:
Inaugural Address, Brigham Young University, 1998.

highly embarrassing to all the radio astronomers who, for so many decades,
had been seeking intelligent messages from space - especially as they had
long ago dismissed the triple system of Alpha, Beta and Proxima Centauri
from all serious consideration.

and solemnly analysed. Lloyds of London collected substantial premiums
from people insuring against every possible future - including some in which
there would have been very little chance of collecting a penny.

suns that would still be shining peacefully billions of years after the galaxy's
splendid giants had burned themselves out. No radio telescope had ever
examined it closely; now all those that could be spared from the approaching
visitor were focused upon its suspected origin.

higher still, it must be freezing.

began to glow faintly with the coming dawn. Morgan looked anxiously at his
watch, and wondered if he would be in time. He was relieved to see that
daybreak was still thirty minutes away.

    There came a delicate tinkling of bells from the temple, still invisible in the
darkness a hundred metres above their heads; and at the same instant all the
lights along that unbelievable stairway were extinguished. Now they could
see, as they stood with their backs towards the hidden sunrise, that the first
faint gleam of day lay on the clouds far below; but the immense bulk of the
mountain still delayed the approaching dawn.

into reality; halfway to the horizon there was an explosion of light as the sun's
rays struck upon some building's eastern windows. And even beyond that -
unless his eyes had tricked him - Morgan could make out the faint, dark band
of the encircling sea.

from the newest member of the galactic telephone exchange.

    And, of course, vice versa. Starglider could understand precisely and
completely what was meant by "the square on the hypotenuse equals the sum
of the squares on the other two sides". But it could scarcely have the faintest
glimmer of what lay in Keats' mind when he wrote:

    During his walk across the worn flagstones of the courtyard, polished
smooth by the feet of innumerable pilgrims, Morgan experienced a sudden
and wholly uncharacteristic indecision. In the name of progress, he was
attempting to destroy something ancient and noble; and something that he
would never fully understand.

Incumbent of the Sri Kanda vihare sat behind a perfectly ordinary office desk,
equipped with standard display and memory units. The only unusual item in
the room was the head of the Buddha, slightly larger than life, on a plinth in
one corner. Morgan could not tell whether it was real, or merely a projection.

mountain."

off his stride.

    "I should explain," the Mahanayake Thero interjected blandly, "that my
colleague was once rather celebrated for his astronomical work. I imagine you
have heard of Dr. Choam Goldberg."

    For by this time Starglider was more than a match for any terrestrial
logician. This was partly the fault of the University of Chicago's Department
of Philosophy; in a fit of monumental hubris, it had clandestinely transmitted
the whole of the Summa Theologica, with disastrous results.

demolish Saint Thomas. Although philosophers were to spend the next
several decades arguing over the analysis, they found only two errors; and
even those could have been due to a misunderstanding of terminology.

    My last update on this matter is 175 years old, but if I understand you
correctly the answer is as follows. Behaviour of the type you call religious
occurred among 3 of the 15 known Class One cultures, 6 of the 28 Class Two
cultures, 5 of the 14 Class Three cultures, 2 of the 10 Class Four cultures, and
3 of the 174 Class Five cultures. You will appreciate that we have many more
examples of Class Five, because only they can be detected over astronomical
distances.

    The hypothesis you refer to as God, though not disprovable by logic alone,
is unnecessary for the following reason.

Or was the entire conversation all part of a careful plan, designed to put the
human race in the right frame of reference - when the first direct messages
from Starholme arrived in, presumably, 104 years?

    As he quickly checked back on his conversation, Morgan decided that he
had not made a fool of himself. Indeed, the Mahanayake Thero might have
lost a tactical advantage by revealing the identity of the Venerable Parakarma.
Yet it was no particular secret; perhaps he thought that Morgan already knew.

the head of the Buddha. It was probably real, for the plinth cast a faint shadow
on the wall behind. Yet even that was not conclusive. The plinth might be
solid enough, and the head a projection carefully positioned on top of it; the
trick was a common one.

    "A copy of the agreement between King Ravindra and the Maha Sangha,
dated Vesak AD 854 of your calendar. It defines the ownership of the temple
land - in perpetuity. The rights set out in this document were even recognised
by the invaders."

    "I sympathise with your feelings," Morgan answered. (But was he lying? he
wondered.) "We would, of course, do our best to minimise any disturbance.
All the support facilities would be buried inside the mountain. Only the
elevator would emerge, and from any distance it would be quite invisible. The
general aspect of the mountain would be totally unchanged. Even your
famous shadow, which I have just admired, would be virtually unaffected."
The Mahanayake Thero turned to his colleague as if seeking confirmation.
The Venerable Parakarma looked straight at Morgan and said: "What about
noise?"

actually be a quieter place."

    "Though we shall have our problems, I don't think that will be one of
them."

    But he knew, and the implacable Parakarma must also know, that absolute
certainty was impossible in such matters. Two hundred and two years ago, on
7 November 1940, that lesson had been driven home in a way that no
engineer could ever forget.

    Morgan blinked, screwed up his eyes, and opened them to reality. This was
the first time he had ever seen golden snow...

    "The Temple. If they ever reach it, Kalidasa will have conquered, and the
bhikkus - the monks - will have to leave. That's the prophecy - it's carved on a
stone slab in the Ranapura Museum. I can show it to you."

    "And we still have them; my great-great-great-grandfather's Silver Ghost is
just as good as new. But I must be fair - it's the visitors who get into trouble,
trying to cope with our local winds. We stick to power-boats. And next year
I'm getting a submarine guaranteed to reach the lake's maximum depth of 78
metres."

    "But I have a few questions. I'm still not clear why there's Midway Station -
and why it's at a height of twenty-five thousand kilometres."

time I suppose the Bridge could have been built for half the cost."

those of the Bridge much less your proposed Tower's."

ourselves or abandon the project."

    The fact that Morgan was on the board of General Tectonics was an old
joke between him and Kingsley; but GT - perhaps fortunately - had never
found a way of controlling and directing earthquakes, nor did it ever expect to
do so. The best that it could hope for was to predict them, and to bleed off
their energies harmlessly before they could do major damage. Even here, its
record of success was not much better than 75 percent.

    Some invisible force had started to pluck at the line of light, drawing it
away from the vertical. The disturbance was moving upwards as it mimicked,
via the computer's millions of calculations a second, the ascent of a payload
through the earth's gravitational field.

    It seemed impossible that thousands of tons of metal could perform such an
aerial ballet; one could more easily believe that the bridge was made of rubber
than of steel. Vast, slow undulations, metres in amplitude, were sweeping
along the entire width of the span, so that the roadway suspended between the
piers twisted back and forth like an angry snake. The wind blowing down the
canyon was sounding a note far too low for any human ears to detect, as it hit
the natural frequency of the beautiful, doomed structure. For hours, the
torsional vibrations had been building up, but no-one knew when the end
would come. Already, the protracted death-throes were a testimonial that the
unlucky designers could well have foregone.

earthquake to complicate the picture, in the so-called "worst case" analysis.

    "We could use one of the lunar freight launchers, and shoot up ten
megatons of moon-rock. It would be a long and expensive job, and we'd still
need a large space-based operation to catch the material and steer it into final
orbit. There would also be a psychological problem -"

    "It's a firm quotation from Central Power."

Taprobanean and World Law, as codified 2085. Unanimous filing."

    "- undoubtedly exceeding his authority and using the resources of his
division on projects which did not concern it."

    "Another twenty years."

had also managed to make notable advances in aero and hydrodynamics -
long regarded as dead subjects, incapable of further surprises.

your time. I'm enjoying my retirement, meeting friends and relatives I haven't
seen for years, and I've no intention of starting a new career."

what you mean. I'd like to meet the people who worked all this out."

it?"

relatively trivial decisions, he had never hesitated for a moment at the major
turning-points of his career. He had always known what to do, and had
seldom been wrong.

remembered pleasures, three decades in his future?

prepared by ingeniously sadistic judges. ("What was the rainfall in the capital
of the world's smallest national state on the day when the second largest
number of home runs was scored in college baseball?" was one that he
recalled with particular affection.) His skill had improved with years, and this
was a perfectly straightforward question. The display came up in thirty
seconds, in far more detail than he really needed.

    "About ten teratons, moving at two kilometres a second. The inner moon,
Phobos. It's a cosmic bulldozer, going past the elevator every eleven hours.
I've not worked out the exact probabilities, but a collision is inevitable every
few days."

wonders of some advanced technology, as he watched the little cyclone move
purposefully into the west, until it disappeared below the graceful line of
palms just inside the ramparts of the Pleasure Gardens.

superimposed on that he replayed from memory, for the hundredth time, the
scratched movie of the dancing bridge. There were all the clues he needed.

world of fantasy. There was a ship that had to sail beneath it, on a perfectly
regular schedule. Unfortunately, the mast was a metre too tall.

    Though Rajasinghe had seen much of the world, he knew no other spot so
full of peace. Sometimes he felt that he could sit here forever, beneath the
blazing moon, wholly unconcerned with all the cares and turmoil of life. He
had never tried to probe too deeply into the magic of the Shrine, for fear that
he would destroy it, but some of its elements were obvious enough. The very
posture of the Enlightened One, resting at last with closed eyes after a long
and noble life, radiated serenity. The sweeping lines of the robe were
extraordinarily soothing and restful to contemplate; they appeared to flow
from the rock, to form waves of frozen stone. And, like the waves of the sea,
the natural rhythm of their curves appealed to instincts of which the rational
mind knew nothing.

    Rather to his surprise, Rajasinghe felt a mild sense of disappointment. And
now, as the apparition came closer, he could see that it undoubtedly was a
cloud, because it was getting slightly frayed around the edges. Its speed was
impressive; it seemed to be driven by a private gale, of which there was still
no trace here at ground level.

    There were no tourists, vacationers or transit passengers here, so far from
Earth; they did their business and sightseeing only a few thousand kilometres
out, and left the high geosynchronous orbit to the scientists and engineers -
not one of whom had ever visited Ashoka on so unusual a mission, or with
such unique equipment.

with his deputy, Warren Kingsley. Now there was a thoroughly nice, gentle
person ("And a better engineer than I am," Morgan had once told her, more
than half seriously). But no-one would ever hear of Warren; he would always
be a dim and faithful satellite of his dazzling primary. As, indeed, he was
perfectly content to be.

not afford to spend a whole week hitched up to an organ regenerator, just for
two centimetres of thumb.

    So - the probe was committed; it was a captive of the earth's atmosphere.
Now the little fuel that remained must be used to steer it into the catching net
spread out on the mountainside. The cables supporting that net were already
thrumming as the wind tore through them.

refused) she was confident that she could identify him. But there was no sign
of the prelate; perhaps he was in the sanctum sanctorum, focusing his
formidable will upon some spiritual exercise.

where the individual concerned is in a position of such eminence, or has such
unique powers, that no-one realises what he is doing until it is too late. The
devastation created by such mad geniuses (there seems no other good term for
them) can be worldwide, as in the case of A. Hitler (1889-1945). In a
surprising number of instances nothing is heard of their activities, thanks to a
conspiracy of silence among their embarrassed peers.

    It was inconceivable that, with a mere fifty kilometres to go, the little probe
would not complete its thirty-six-thousand kilometre journey. But for that
matter how many aircraft - and spacecraft - had come to grief in the last few
metres?

    "Range two five. Not enough propellent to get back on course. Estimate
we'll miss by three kilometres."

tongue as effectively as his limbs. But this time he addressed Morgan before
the engineer could speak to him.

the work of men who had died sixteen centuries ago. And in his ears sounded
the tolling of the mighty bell that had once summoned the faithful to prayer.

miraculous defeat had been converted into an even more inexplicable victory,
yet he felt no sense of triumph - only confusion and astonishment.

    "That's always a risky word to use. Let me tell you a little story. A dear
friend, a great scientist, now dead, used to tease me by saying that because
politics is the art of the possible, it appeals only to second-rate minds. For the
first-raters, he claimed, are only interested in the impossible. And do you
know what I answered?"

    "I don't know; nor does Ambassador Rajasinghe. But when I asked him he
said: They'll be all right. An order that's lived frugally for three thousand
years is not exactly destitute."

    "Oh - let's think - something like Space Wars 2000. I'm sure you'll be able
to trace it."

    "Barring a major catastrophe, like damage to the tower or tracks."

remind them of the pioneering days of aviation, when it took five hours
merely to cross the Pacific. And, of course, we're offering low-gee comfort
almost all the way."

    Engraving from 1881 Edition of

which he was quite unable to make any judgements, and had to rely
completely on the advice of others. From the beginning, it had been obvious
that only some form of magnetic propulsion could operate at such speeds; the
slightest physical contact - at more than a kilometre a second! - would result
in disaster. And yet the four pairs of guidance slots running up the faces of the
tower had only centimetres of clearance around the magnets; they had to be
designed so that enormous restoring forces came instantly into play,
correcting any movement of the capsule away from the centre line.

    "Why did you leave it until now?" Dr. Sen had asked, in a tone appropriate
to a retarded child.

    "Coronary alarm."

    "And then?"

appropriate day (unless, as was frequently the case, there had been some
stupid mistake in programming) the right message would be automatically
flashed to its destination. And even though the recipient might shrewdly
suspect that the warm words on his screen were entirely due to electronics -
the nominal sender not having thought of him for years - the gesture was
nevertheless welcome.

    Elevator, space

    "There are psychological problems as well as engineering ones," he said.
"Think it over. I'll see you at the office."

photograph so well faked that some visitors could not believe that its
components were all perfectly genuine. It was dominated by the graceful,
beautifully restored steamship - ancestor of every vessel that could thereafter
call itself modern. By her side, standing on the dock to which she had been
miraculously returned a century and a quarter after her launch, was Dr.
Vannevar Morgan. He was looking up at the scrollwork of the painted prow;
and a few metres away, looking quizzically at him, was Isambard Kingdom
Brunel - hands thrust in pockets, cigar clenched firmly in his mouth, and
wearing a very rumpled, mud-spattered suit.

    "I'm always serious, at this hour of the morning. It's time I did another story
on the Tower anyway. That capsule mock-up is very pretty, but it doesn't do
anything. My viewers like action, and so do I. The last time we met, you
showed me drawings of those little cars the engineers will use to run up and
down the cable - I mean tapes. What did you call them?"

orientated aspects of our culture. Was this accidental, or the result of some
deliberate policy? There are many questions one would like to ask Starglider,
now that it is too late - or too early.

twice the load it would be carrying now. There had been the usual minor
teething problems, but nothing serious; the last five runs had been completely
trouble-free. And what could go wrong? If there was a power failure - almost
unthinkable, in such a simple battery-operated system - gravity would bring
Maxine safely home, the automatic brakes limiting the speed of descent. The
only real risk was that the drive mechanism might jam, trapping Spider and its
passenger in the upper atmosphere. And Morgan had an answer even for this.

that no producer of video-drama would decide that there was good material
here for a cliff-hanger. That was the sort of publicity he could do without.

    37 . The Billion-Ton Diamond

adjusted so that it would always be in balance. Its cross-section would
decrease steadily from orbit, where it would be under the maximum stress,
down to Earth; it would also taper off towards the anchoring counter-weight.

and bolts to entire space villages, had been accumulating in Earth orbit. All
that came below the extreme elevation of the Tower, at any time, now had to
be accounted for, since they created a possible hazard. Three-quarters of this
material was abandoned junk, much of it long forgotten. Now it had to be
located, and somehow disposed of.

waves back to earth.

level, perhaps some kind of life might still have arisen on earth; but it would
never have evolved into anything remotely resembling us...

period of instability which may produce a new Ice Age, more universal than
any in the past. If this is true, we need every scrap of information we can get
to prepare for it. Even a century's warning might not be long enough.

liaison with Ingrid - he might have taken a different path; but accident or
ambition had deflected him.

had disdained the usual light thermocoat.

planet with its new moon.

    The boy peered intently for a moment, then answered: "I can see the four
tapes, going inwards - I mean upwards - until they disappear."

forcibly, to get his equipment installed before the peak of the current sunspot
maximum.

    The driver (he insisted on being called pilot) retorted that this was
inpossible, as the guidance slots down which the capsule was falling
terminated several metres short of the Tower's end; there was also an
elaborate buffer system, just in case all four independent sets of brakes failed
to work. And everyone agreed that the joke, besides being perfectly
ridiculous, was in extremely poor taste.

steadily to a rumbling roar, with tearing, ripping undertones, quite unlike that
of a re-entering spacecraft. Up in the sky something metallic was sparkling in
the last rays of the sun, growing larger and larger and leaving a trail of smoke
behind it. As it expanded, it disintegrated; pieces shot off in all directions,
some of them burning as they did so. For a few seconds an eye as keen as the
leopard's might have glimpsed a roughly cylindrical object, before it exploded
into a myriad fragments. But the leopard did not wait for the final catastrophe;
it had already disappeared into the jungle.

    It was useless to speculate until he had more facts; and in this case, where
all the evidence had probably been destroyed, they might never be available.
He knew that space accidents seldom had a single cause; they were usually
the result of a chain of events, often quite harmless in themselves. All the
foresight of the safety engineers could not guarantee absolute reliability, and
sometimes their own over-elaborate precautions contributed to disaster.
Morgan was not ashamed of the fact that the safety of the project now
concerned him far more than any loss of life. Nothing could be done about the
dead, except to ensure that the same accident could never happen again. But
that the almost completed Tower might be endangered was a prospect too
appalling to contemplate.

    Across the display panel, the red ALARM symbols flashed yet again.
Chang studied them with a frown of annoyance, then pressed the RESET
button. They flickered once, then vanished.

    And so was Professor Sessui, by the combined exertions of pilot, assistant
engineer and steward, when he tried to go back for his precious instruments.
The airlock doors were slammed shut just seconds before the engine
compartment bulkhead finally gave way.

    Deep inside the mountain, amid the display and communications
equipment of the Earth Operations Centre, Morgan and his engineering staff
stood around the tenth-scale hologram of the Tower's lowest section. It was
perfect in every detail, even to the four thin ribbons of the guiding tapes
extending along each face. They vanished into thin air just above the floor,
and it was hard to appreciate that, even on this diminished scale, they should
continue downwards for another sixty kilometers - completely through the
crust of the earth.

afterthought; at one time it had been considered unnecessary to build a refuge
here, in the section of the Tower that would eventually become part of Earth
Terminus itself.

before CO2 build-up knocks us out - perhaps someone will work out that as
well. Whatever the answer, I'm afraid it will be too optimistic." Chang's voice
dropped several decibels and he began to speak in an almost conspiratorial
tone, obviously to prevent being overheard. "The Prof and his students don't
know this, but the south airlock was damaged in the explosion. There's a leak
- a steady hiss round the gaskets. How serious it is, I can't tell." The speaker's
voice rose to normal level again. "Well, that's the situation. We'll be waiting to
hear from you."

    "We can do it," said Warren Kingsley with a broad smile. "Spider can reach
the Basement."

Station. And if necessary Spider can make a second trip."

    "I'm fifteen kilos lighter than Kingsley," he told Bartok. "In a marginal
operation like this, that should settle the matter. So let's not waste any more
precious time in argument."

his own, just to satisfy his own selfish pride? If Safety Officer Bartok had
known about this...

    Every time he came here he found it more difficult to breathe, and he
looked forward to the flood of oxygen that would soon gush into his starved
lungs. But CORA, to his surprised relief, had never issued even a preliminary
admonition when he visited the summit; the regime that Dr. Sen had
prescribed seemed to be working admirably.

airlock. It seemed astonishing that such a small amount of equipment could
mean the difference between life and death for so many people.

Nevertheless, with his usual engineer's caution, Morgan observed that oxygen
stood at 102 percent, main battery power at 101 percent, booster battery at
105 percent. ..

view for the next couple of hours. If you wanted a running commentary, you
should have sent Maxine Duval."

    "Oh - it's fading out - getting bigger and fainter - now it's gone - I suppose
the air's too thin for it - I'm sorry to see it go -"

had so spectacular a view. The storm was developing rapidly; short-wave
radio - still used for many non-essential services - would by now have been
disrupted all over the world. Morgan was not sure if he heard or felt a faint
rustling, like the whisper of falling sand or the crackle of dry twigs. Unlike
the static of the fireball, it certainly did not come from the speaker system,
because it was still there when he switched off the circuit.

tourist liner cruising through the tropical night, and he remembered how he
had joined the other passengers on the stern, entranced by the beauty and
wonder of the bioluminescent wake. Some of the greens and blues flickering
below him now matched the plankton-generated colours he had seen then, and
he could easily imagine that he was again watching the byproducts of life -
the play of giant, invisible beasts, denizens of the upper atmosphere. . .

It did not wholly account for his sense of happiness - even of joy. Warren
Kingsley, who was fond of diving, had often told him that he felt such an
emotion in the weightless environment of the sea. Morgan had never shared
it, but now he knew what it must be like. He seemed to have left all his cares
down there on the planet hidden below the fading loops and traceries of the
aurora.

climbing the graceful catenary to the kite. Then Morgan would give a sharp
tug, and the cardboard weight would slip out of the rubber band. The
parachute would float away into the sky, while the wood-and-wire rider came
swiftly back to his hand, in readiness for the next launch.

Control to dump a few barrels of electrons in the right places. Not their usual
line of business, but they're good at improvising. . . . aren't they?"

hundred, even at full power. No tests or calculations were necessary;
Morgan's diagnosis was instant, for the figures spoke for themselves. Sick
with frustration, he reported back to Earth.

of Damocles, and had never ceased to predict its eventual plunge to earth. Yet
even Paul had admitted that the Tower had already produced some benefits.

that his first fears were groundless. Morgan was not stuck; he was unable to
complete the journey. He could return to earth whenever he wished - but if he
did Professor Sessui and his colleagues would certainly be doomed.

accommodation. The huge palace was slowly falling into decay while the
Dalai Lama's executors haggled with the Chinese Federal Government over
the cost of maintenance. According to Rajasinghe's latest information, the
Maha Thero was now negotiating with the Vatican - also in chronic financial
difficulties, but at least still master of its own house.

    49. A Bumpy Ride

thing. I want a light behind and above me - there must be somebody in the
right position."

deputy's voice.

    "So I warned you. You'll have to try harder. Two seconds at least."

    "I'd like to send my compliments to the people who made that safety strap,"
said Morgan wryly. "Now what do you suggest? A three-second drop before I
slam on the brakes?"

    01 16 10

    The seconds dragged by. . . one minute. . . two minutes...

    There were megawatt-hours of energy stored in Spider's own battery; could
he use that in any way? He had a brief fantasy of establishing an arc and
burning through the strap; but even if suitable heavy conductors were
available - and of course they weren't - the main power supply was
inaccessible from the control cab.

    "I'm trying an experiment," be said. "Leave me alone for a few minutes."

the really tricky part.

    "Would you settle for five?" he pleaded. "I'm rather busy at the moment."

    "Can't say. But I'm sure the cut's pretty deep by this time. It must be. . .

that it was clamped around the hinges of the open door. Yet still he did not
pull himself back into the cabin; he was hypnotised by the sight of the falling
battery, slowly rotating like some strange celestial body as it dwindled from
sight. It took a long time to vanish completely; and not until then did Morgan
drag himself to safety, and collapse into his seat.

of Taprobane. Only a few metres away - indeed, so close that he felt he could
touch them - the other three guiding tapes were ribbons of light, converging
towards the Tower. He followed their dwindling perspective - and there it
was.

    "You can still make it," he said. "Give the battery ten minutes to recuperate.
There's still enough energy there for that last couple of kilometres."

way.

    It was to Morgan's credit that he felt his own fate was sealed, in the
desolating moment when the last dregs of power were exhausted, and the
lights on Spider's display panel finally faded out. Not for several seconds did
he remember that he had only to release the brakes and he would slide back to
Earth. In three hours he could be safely back in bed. No-one would blame him
for the failure of his mission; he had done all that was humanly possible.

    "What the hell does it matter? It could be a light-year."

    It was all a matter of Relativity. He could not reach the Tower; but the
Tower would reach him - at its inexorable two kilometres a day.

messages.

the emergency that had arrived at last. Their illumination revealed a scene that
might have come from some old war; here were homeless and dishevelled
refugees from a devastated city, huddling in a bomb shelter with the few
possessions they had been able to save. Not many such refugees, however,
would have carried bags labelled PROJECTION, LUNAR HOTEL
CORPORATION, PROPERTY OF THE FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF MARS,
or the ubiquitous MAY/NOT/BE STOWED IN VACUUM. Nor would they
have been so cheerful; even those who were lying down to conserve oxygen
managed a smile and a languid wave. Morgan had just returned the salute
when his legs buckled beneath him, and everything blacked out. Never before
in his life had he fainted, and when the blast of cold oxygen revived him his
first emotion was one of acute embarrassment. His eyes came slowly into
focus, and be saw masked shapes hovering over him. For a moment he
wondered if he was in hospital; then brain and vision returned to normal.
While he was still unconscious, his precious cargo must have been unloaded.

unloaded when Professor Sessui added, rather anxiously; "I'm sorry we can't
offer you a chair - this is the best we can do." He pointed to a couple of
instrument boxes, one on top of the other. "You really should take it easy."

world before she dies. Much good that would do. I'd prefer not to know."

    The catwalk that surrounded the Basement was a metal grille about two
metres wide; beyond it the safety net had been stretched out for another thirty
metres. The portion that Morgan could see had caught nothing whatsoever
during its years of patient waiting.

be able to see his signals; he could talk to them in Morse code.

overhead was the dazzling beacon of Ashoka, poised forever above Hindustan
- and only a few hundred kilometres from the Tower complex. Halfway down
in the east was Confucius, much lower still Kamehameha, while high up from
the west shone Kinte and Imhotep. These were merely the brightest signposts
along the equator; there were literally scores of others, all of them far more
brilliant than Sirius. How astonished one of the old astronomers would have
been to see this necklace around the sky; and how bewildered he would have
become when, after an hour or so's observation, he discovered that they were
quite immobile - neither rising nor setting while the familiar stars drifted past
in their ancient courses.

connected rigidly up there in orbit, the problems of stability that plagued a
single tower would vanish. Africa - South America, the Gilbert Islands,
Indonesia - they could all provide locations for earth terminals, if desired. For
some day, as materials improved and knowledge advanced, the Towers could
be made invulnerable even to the worst hurricanes, and mountain sites would
no longer be necessary. If he had waited another hundred years, perhaps he
need not have disturbed the Maha Thero.

this problem - or with any other. Now he could not even hear the words; a
faint but steady roar had obliterated all other sounds. Though he knew that it
existed only in his mind - or the labyrinthine channels of his ears - it seemed
completely real; he could believe that he was standing at the foot of some
great waterfall. ..

    A Master of the Swarms, It had recently conjugated Itself into human form.
Apart from one minor detail, the likeness was excellent; but the dozen
children who had accompanied the Holmer in the autocopter were in a
constant state of mild hysteria - the younger ones frequently dissolving into
giggles.

down from the cloudless sky still seemed intolerably bright. Though all its
warmth had gone, drained away by the sickness that had attacked its core a
thousand years ago, its fierce, cold light revealed every detail of the stricken
land, and flashed in splendour from the approaching glaciers.

streamed up the equatorial Towers and flowed sunwards towards the young
oceans of Venus, the fertile plains of Mercury's Temperate Zone. Five
hundred years hence, when the sun had recovered, the exiles would return.
Mercury would be abandoned, except for the polar regions; but Venus would
be a permanent second home. The quenching of the sun had given the
incentive, and the opportunity, for the taming of that hellish world.

ARISTOTLE knew the truth. There seemed to be a continuous spectrum
between absolute fantasy and hard historical facts, with every possible
graduation in between. At the one end were such figures as Columbus and
Leonardo and Einstein and Lenin and Newton and Washington, whose very
voices and images had often been preserved. At the other extreme were Zeus
and Alice and King Kong and Gulliver and Siegfried and Merlin, who could
not possibly have existed in the real world. But what was one to make of
Robin Hood or Tarzan or Christ or Sherlock Holmes or Odysseus or
Frankenstein? Allowing for a certain amount of exaggeration, they might well
have been actual historic personages.

several years ahead of schedule, in preparation for the next six-hundred-year
lap of its journey. That would represent no time at all to the Starholmer, of
course, for It would not reconjugate until the end of the voyage, but then It
might well face the greatest challenge of Its long career. For the first time a
Starprobe had been destroyed - or at least silenced - soon after it had entered a
solar system. Perhaps it had at last made contact with the mysterious Hunters
of the Dawn, who had left their marks upon so many worlds, so inexplicably
close to the Beginning itself. If the Starholmer had been capable of awe, or of
fear, It would have known both, as It contemplated its future, six hundred
years hence.

Paranavitana. I am also indebted to his monumental two-volume study of the
inscriptions on the Mirror Wall, Sigiri Graffiti (Oxford University Press,
1956). Some of the verses I have quoted are genuine; other I have only
slightly invented.

(Dr. Allyn Vine's name, incidentally is now immortalised in that of the
famous research submersible "Alvin".) It was later discovered that the
concept had already been developed six years earlier - and on a much more
ambitious scale - by a Leningrad engineer, Y. N. Artsutanov (Komsomolskaya
Pravda, 31 July 1960). Artsutanov considered a "heavenly funicular", to use
his engaging name for the device, lifting no less than 12,000 tons a day to
synchronous orbit. It seems surprising that this daring idea received so little
publicity; the only mention I have ever seen of it is in the handsome volume
of paintings by Alexei Leonov and Sokolov, The Stars are Awaiting Us
(Moscow 1967). One colour plate (page 25) shows the "Space Elevator" in
action; the caption reads: ". . . the satellite will, so to say, stay fixed in a
certain point in the sky. If a cable is lowered from the satellite to the earth you
will have a ready cable-road. An 'Earth-Sputnik-Earth' elevator for freight and
passengers can then be built, and it will operate without any rocket
propulsion."

independently re-invented at least three times. A very detailed treatment,
containing many new ideas, was published by Jerome Pearson of Wright-
Paterson Air Force Base in Acta Astronautica for September-October 1975
("The Orbital Tower; a spacecraft launcher using the Earth's rotational
energy"). Dr. Pearson was astonished to hear of the earlier studies, which his
computer survey had failed to locate; he discovered them through reading my
own testimony to the House of Representatives Space Committee in July
1975. (See The View From Serendip.)

Pearson's "Using the Orbital Tower to Launch Earth-Escape Payloads Daily"
(Proceedings of the 27th International Astronautical Federation Congress,
October 1976) and a remarkable paper by Hans Moravec, "A Non-
Synchronous Orbital Skyhook" (American Astronautical Society Annual
Meeting, San Francisco, 18-20 October 1977).

