OceanofPDF.com

THE PICTURE OF DORIAN GRAY

OSCAR FINGAL O’FLAHERTIE WILLS WILDE was born in Dublin in 1854, the

son of an eminent eye-surgeon and a nationalist poetess who wrote

under the pseudonym of Speranza’. He went to Trinity College,

Dublin, and then to Magdalen College, Oxford, where he began to

propagandize the new Aesthetic (or ‘Art for Art’s Sake’) Movement.

Despite gaining a ɹrst and winning the Newdigate Prize for Poetry,

Wilde failed to obtain an Oxford scholarship, and was forced to earn

a living by lecturing and writing for periodicals. He published a

largely unsuccessful volume of poems in 1881 and in the next year

undertook a lecture tour of the United States in order to promote

the D’Oyly Carte production of Gilbert and Sullivan’s comic opera,

Patience. After his marriage to Constance Lloyd in 1884, he tried to

establish himself as a writer, but with little initial success. However,

his three volumes of short ɹction, The Happy Prince (1888), Lord

Arthur Savile’s Crime (1891) and A House of Pomegranates (1891),

together with his only novel, The Picture of Dorian Gray (1891),

gradually won him a reputation conɹrmed and enhanced by the

phenomenal success of his society comedies – Lady Windermere’s

Fan, A Woman of No Importance, An Ideal Husband and The

Importance of Being Earnest, all performed on the West End stage

between 1892 and 1895.

success as a dramatist was at its height, Wilde brought an

1900.

ROBERT MIGHALL completed a Ph.D. on Gothic ɹction and Victorian

of Oxford. In 1997 he became the editor of Penguin Classics; he now

works as a consultant and occasional writer. His publications

include an edition of Oscar Wilde’s poems for Everyman Paperbacks,

a study of Victorian Gothic ɹction for Oxford University Press

(1999) and the Penguin Classics edition of Robert Louis Stevenson’s

The Strange Case of Doctor Jekyll and Mr Hyde and Other Tales of

Terror. He is a Fellow of the Royal Society of Arts. He lives in

London.

OSCAR WILDE

The Picture of Dorian Gray

Edited with an Introduction and Notes by 

ROBERT MIGHALL

PENGUIN BOOKS

PENGUIN BOOKS

Published by the Penguin Group 

Penguin Books Ltd, 80 Strand, London, WC2R 0RL, England 

Penguin Putnam Inc., 375 Hudson Street, New York, New York 10014, USA 

Penguin Books Australia Ltd, 250 Camberwell Road, Camberwell, Victoria 3124, Australia 

Penguin Books Canada Ltd, 10 Alcorn Avenue, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M4V 3B2 

Penguin Books India (P) Ltd, 11 Community Centre, Panchsheel Park, New Delhi – 110

017, India 

Penguin Books (NZ) Ltd, Cnr Rosedale and Airborne Roads Albany, Auckland, New Zealand

Penguin Books (South Africa) (Pty) Ltd, 24 Sturdee Avenue, Rosebank 2196, South Africa

Penguin Books Ltd, Registered Oɽces: 80 Strand, London, WC2R 0RL, England

www.penguin.com 

First published 1891 

Published in Penguin Classics 2000 

Reprinted with minor revisions 2003

Introduction and Notes copyright © Robert Mighall, 2000 

Appendix (Introduction to the First Penguin Classics Edition) 

copyright © Peter Ackroyd, 1985 

All rights reserved

The moral right of the editor has been asserted 

Except in the United States of America, this book is sold subject to the condition that it

shall not, by way of trade or otherwise, be lent, re-sold, hired out, or otherwise circulated

without the publisher’s prior consent in any form of binding or cover other than that in

which it is published and without a similar condition including this condition being

imposed on the subsequent purchaser

CONTENTS

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

INTRODUCTION

CHRONOLOGY

FURTHER READING

A NOTE ON THE TEXT

The Picture of Dorian Gray

APPENDIX 1 Selected Contemporary Reviews 

of The Picture of Dorian Gray

APPENDIX 2 Introduction to the First Penguin Classics Edition, by Peter

Ackroyd

NOTES

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

I would like to thank the very helpful staʃ at the William Andrews

consult the typescript of the Lippincotts edition. A number of experts

and friends have shared their expertise with me. My thanks to Owen

Dudley Edwards, who I have no doubt relished the opportunity to

edit his editor; to Barry Milligan and Matthew Sweet for advice on

the opium passages; to Linda Dowling, Lawrence Normand, Merlin

Holland, Bill Bynum, Sonia Massai and Patricia Ingham for clues

here and there; and thanks to Laura Barber for some good ideas and

wonderful assistance over the years. Thanks to Helen and Phil, and

John and Jeremy at the outset, and to Michele at the Californian

conclusion.

INTRODUCTION

(New readers are advised that this introduction makes the detail of

the plot explicit.)

On 20 June 1890 the Philadelphian Lippincott’s Monthly Magazine

published Oscar Wilde’s The Picture of Dorian Gray as the lead story

for its July number. Wilde revised and enlarged this, his ɹrst and

only novel, for appearance in book form the following April.

Hitherto the thirty-ɹve-year-old author had published a book of

poems (1881; largely ignored or ridiculed), had had one play

produced (unsuccessfully, in New York in 1883), published a book

of fairy tales (1888; on the whole well received), and had published

some essays and stories in literaryjournals.1 Wilde had reviewed

many novels, and discoursed on the art of the novelist in ‘The Decay

of Lying’; now was his chance to practise what he had been

preaching, and to fulɹl the great potential his proɹle had promised

when he graduated from Oxford and set about promoting himself in

London’s literary society. The Picture of Dorian Gray, published in

the ɹrst year of the decade that would see him feted as the most

successful society playwright of his day, and then pilloried as the

most infamous sexual outlaw of the time, was his ɹrst signiɹcant

and successful major work of art.

ɹve years later when what some believed they had found

thundered:

The story – which deals with matters only ɹtted for the Criminal

Investigation Department or a hearing in camera – is discreditable

alike to author and editor. Mr Wilde has brains, and art, and style;

telegraph-boys, the sooner he takes to tailoring (or some other

decent trade) the better for his own reputation and the public

morals. (5 July 1890)

The remark about noblemen and telegraph-boys refers to a recent

scandal (last mentioned in the press only two months earlier)

involving a homosexual brothel in London’s Cleveland Street, and

was therefore a fairly direct suggestion that Wilde’s text was

unambiguous in what it described.2 Questions of the role of art and

its relation to morality, and to the author’s life dominated debate

about The Picture of Dorian Gray at the time of publication, in

published shortly afterwards, and again at the time of his trials.3

They dominate it still, for it is diɽcult to discuss the novel outside

of this framework or without an awareness of subsequent events.

But this is understandable. To a great extent Wilde’s text encourages

such debate, with its central conceit of a work of art that somehow

‘confesses’ to its creator’s desire, and bears testimony to a life of

‘immorality’ or crime. Some of these issues – of art and morality, of

censorship and interpretation, of deception and revelation – will be

discussed in this introduction to a work that is very much a product

of its times, but which still fascinates readers over a hundred years

after its ɹrst publication.

DOUBLE LIVES AND SECRET VICES

‘… there are certain temperaments that marriage makes more complex… They are

forced to have more than one life.’ (Lord Henry, in Chapter VI)

Oscar Wilde, artist, Irishman, dandiacal mocker of the standards of

his society, was also a ‘gentleman’, and was acutely aware of what

this meant, and defensive of his right to this title. His father was an

eminent surgeon who was knighted for his services to science, his

mother (despite her radical Irish nationalism) a celebrated society

hostess. Oscar was educated at Portora, a famous Irish public school,

and attended both Trinity College, Dublin and Oxford University

(Ireland’s and England’s oldest universities). At the latter he took an

excellent double ɹrst and came close to being awarded a university

fellowship, thus very nearly becoming a member of the English

Because ‘Ashton is a gentleman’s name’, whereas ‘Hubbard

particularly smells of the tradesman’.4 More seriously, when Wilde

engaged his counsel for his ɹrst trial, and was asked by Edward

Clarke if he would give his word ‘as an English gentleman’ that the

allegations were not true, Wilde assented.5 Wilde would therefore

have agreed with the words he gave to Basil Hallward in his tale

when the latter asserted that ‘every gentleman is interested in his

good name’; and yet, like Dorian, Wilde had for some time been

indulging in activities that were illegal and viliɹed by ‘respectable’

society, and which therefore forced him to live a double life. As one

biographer puts it, ‘After 1886 he was able to think of himself as a

criminal, moving guiltily among the innocent’,6 being initiated into

homosexual acts by his friend Robert Ross in that year. While in

1890 he had not quite abandoned himself to the reckless behaviour

he would later term‘feasting with panthers’ (De Profundis), he had

had a number of homosexual encounters and identiɹed himself as a

member of a clandestine sub-culture.

really reckless, at any rate in his relations to society’ (Chapter XI).

Dorian in fact relishes his ability to indulge in his immoral, illegal or

told how,

Often, on returning home from one of those mysterious and prolonged absences that

gave rise to such strange conjecture… he himself would creep upstairs to the locked room,

open the door… and stand, with a mirror, in front of the portrait that Basil Hallward had

painted of him, looking now at the evil and aging face on the canvas, and now at the fair

young face that laughed back at him from the polished glass. The very sharpness of the

contrast used to quicken his sense of pleasure. He grew more and more enamoured of his

own beauty, more and more interested in the corruption of his own soul. (Chapter XI)

And when he appears at a society gathering not twenty-four

hours after committing a treacherous murder, we are told that

Dorian ‘felt keenly the terrible pleasure of a double life’ (Chapter

XV). The passage describing Dorian’s subsequent trip to an

opiumden that same evening eʃectively conveys his divided

existence. At ɹrst the cabby refuses to take him so far from his usual

way in the labyrinth of unpathed courts and alleys so far removed

obscurity.

And yet, while such passages serve to establish a socio-economic

divisions are not rigid or absolute. High life and low life are often

to relish ‘the coarse brawl, the loathsome den, the crude violence of

disordered life, the very vileness of thief and outcast’ (Chapter XVI),

this explicit when he asserts to Dorian that ‘Crime belongs

degree. I should fancy that crime was to them what art is to us,

XIX). The criminal and the aesthete (combined in the ɹgure of

Dorian) stand together in Wilde’s text.

However, Wilde’s novel goes further in blurring the distinctions

between high and low, respectable and outcast. For while this

as much and had their suspicions conɹrmed in some learned

quarters),7 Lord Henry’s rapier wit threatens to indict a much larger

section of the social spectrum. The dandy’s epigrams provide a

glimpse of the world Wilde would soon dissect in his social

comedies, where a guilty past or present is the norm, and nearly

everyone indulges in some degree of ‘Bunburying’.8 As Dorian

reminds Basil, ‘we are in the native land of the hypocrite’. Therefore

while Dorian constitutes an extreme combination of cultivation and

corruption (the embodiment of the idea of ‘Decadence’), in some

respects this supreme hypocrite is, as Henry puts it, ‘the type of

what the age is searching for, and what it is afraid it has found’

(Chapter XIX).

By suggesting that duplicity is an essential part of existence in

late-Victorian society, and that Dorian is an extreme version of an

unacknowledged norm, Wilde’s novel resembles that other great

fantastic tale of doubling and transformation published four years

earlier: Robert Louis Stevenson’s Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr

Hyde (1886), a work which Wilde knew and admired.9 Dr Jekyll

creates a potion that transforms him into the criminal and bestial Mr

Hyde. This potion eʃectively divides his nature, giving his less

‘upright twin’, as he terms Hyde, release from the constraints of

social conformity, and allowing Jekyll himself to still walk the path

respectable side. As Jekyll puts it, ‘I was often plunged into a kind of

wonder at my [i.e. Hyde’s] vicarious depravity.’10 But what is most

troubling about Stevenson’s tale is the suggestion that although the

means of this physical division are clearly fantastical and the results

extreme, the experience of Dr Jekyll is far from unique. His divided

self, it is implied, was a common experience among members of his

class – a world of ‘ordinary secret sinners’, as he terms it.

Recognizing that ‘Man is not truly one, but truly two’, Jekyll merely

contrives the means to make this division concrete. In short, the

claims of ‘respectability’ necessitated Hyde. Long caged, he came

out roaring.

We must bear in mind that, until its ɹnal pages and for its ɹrst

readers, Stevenson’s ‘strange case’ involves not one person but two.

It records friends’ various attempts to understand the relationship

between two of the most unlikely companions: what the lawyer

Utterson calls Jekyll’s ‘strange preference’ for the grotesque thug

Hyde. Utterson is determined to discover why his respectable friend

is honouring Hyde’s cheques, protecting him from the law, and has

even made him the principal legatee in his will; perhaps most

worrying of all, he has set him up in an apartment in Soho, a

distinctly shady part of town. Blackmail is suspected, and blackmail

was a fact of life for middle-class homosexuals at the time. Indeed,

before the publication of Stevenson’s tale, was known as the

himself was subjected to a number of blackmail attempts.11

However, while all speculation about the respectable physician’s

relationship with Hyde is brilliantly dispelled at the end in Jekyll’s

‘Full Statement of the Case’ (when it is revealed that two people are

actually one), Wilde’s novel, especially the ɹrst published version, is

more ambiguous. Unlike Stevenson, Wilde does not provide a ‘full

statement’ to clear up any speculation about why Lord Henry and

Dorian should take a house together in Algiers (a well-known retreat

for homosexuals at the time), or why Dorian’s ‘friendship is so fatal

to young men’. As a consequence it provoked the outraged response

referred to above. Many reviewers believed they understood what

Wilde was describing;12 and Wilde, despite his bravura and

readiness to respond to the ‘prurient’ reviewers with a ɻat denial of

any suggestion of ‘immorality’ in his tale, may have feared that he,

like Basil, had ‘put too much of himself in his work of art. Perhaps

he had.

CODES AND REVISIONS

Wilde loved secrets and mysteries. When he joined the Freemasons

at Oxford, part of the attraction was its code of absolute secrecy and

the arcana of its rituals. His short story, ‘The Sphinx Without a

Secret’, tells a tale of exactly that: a woman who surrounds herself

with an aura of mystery and acts out an elaborate charade merely

for the love of mystery. At the premiere of his play Lady

conspirators.13 The Picture of Dorian Gray perhaps wears a few green

carnations of its own. It is certainly a ‘coded’ text, directing those in

the know to understand its hints and suggestions. The name ‘Dorian’

itself is perhaps a coded reference to ‘Greek love’, the historical and

pedagogical euphemism for the homoerotic practices that were a

part of everyday life in ancient Greece, but which were glossed over

or viliɹed by Victorian teachers of the Classics.14 By calling his

principal character Dorian, Wilde is perhaps hinting at the

‘Greekness’ of his relationship with the two older men who agree

that he was ‘made to be worshipped’. And when Wilde claimed that

of all the characters in his novel Dorian was the one he most wished

to be, but ‘in other ages, perhaps’,15 he was perhaps wistfully

alluding to the fact that he would be Dorian (Greek) in a Dorian

age, an age which sanctioned what, to quote Lord Henry, his own

‘monstrous age’ had ‘made monstrous and unlawful’. Other names

have potential signiɹcance. At times the historical references with

which the text is conspicuously laden amount to a roll-call of

famous homosexuals. In one passage, which ostensibly catalogues

Dorian’s interest in jewels, there is a reference to the suit of armour

which Edward II gave to his lover Piers Gaveston, and to the

earrings worn by James I’s ‘favourites’. Indeed, as we learn later,

one of these favourites was Philip Herbert, Dorian’s ancestor, who

homosexual lifestyle.

Indeed, one of the most telling signs that Wilde had not been

indicated in the Notes, pp. 231–53). Wilde had already made a

manuscript to typescript, cutting out or modifying even more

some of the more forthright reviews.16 When he revised the book for

volume form he went further. In the 1890 version there had been a

much greater degree of physical intimacy between the principal

male characters. In Chapter I, when Basil Hallward tells Lord Henry

about his beautiful new friend, Henry lays ‘his hand upon [Basil’s]

shoulder’. This seemingly innocent or inconsequential gesture Wilde

chose to omit in 1891. Perhaps he felt he had gone too far, and

could not risk being either too explicit or too ambiguous about these

relationships. Thus despite deɹantly asserting that ‘what Dorian

Gray’s sins are no one knows’17 in a letter responding to the Scots

Observer’s insinuations about the Cleveland Street scandal, he none

‘Why is your friendship so fateful to young men?’ In the ɹrst version

the ‘unspeakable’ crimes some readers or reviewers might have

suspected.

The most signiɹcant changes in this respect involve the role of

exhibited when Basil explains to Dorian what his portrait revealed

to its creator, and what he feared it might proclaim to the world.

This is how it appeared in 1890:

‘It is quite true that I have worshipped you with far more romance of feeling than a

man usually gives to a friend. Somehow, I had never loved a woman. I suppose I never had

time…. Well, from the moment I met you, your personality had the most extraordinary

inɻuence over me. I quite admit that I adored you madly, extravagantly, absurdly. I was

jealous of every one to whom you spoke. I wanted to have you all to myself. I was only

happy when I was with you. When I was away from you, you were still present in my art.’

‘Platonic’ interpretation of the artist’s need for his model:

‘Dorian, from the moment I met you, your personality had the most extraordinary

inɻuence over me. I was dominated, soul, brain, and power by you. You became to me the

visible incarnation of that unseen ideal whose memory haunts us artists like an exquisite

dream. I worshipped you. I grew jealous of every one to whom you spoke. I wanted to have

you all to myself. I was only happy when I was with you. When you were away from me

you were still present in my art…’ (Chapter IX; original ellipsis)

It is now Dorian’s personality that dominates Basil’s ‘soul, brain,

and power’. His adoration or ‘worship’ is transformed into a

philosophical quest for a chaste and literally Platonic ideal of art.

According to Basil, this ‘aesthetic’ adoration communicates itself

to the painting. In 1890, however, this process was interpreted

not exhibit the painting because he had put into it ‘all the

speak to him’. In 1891 this is changed to ‘some expression of all this

curious artistic idolatry’. The portrait no longer runs the risk of

revealing Basil’s ‘romantic’ attachment to Dorian (making him

believe he had put ‘too much of myself in the thing’, as he earlier

put it); it is now merely the physical manifestation of an artistic

ideal. Signiɹcantly, the unmodiɹed versions of these passages were

read out in court in 1895 in an attempt to prove that Dorian Gray

was a ‘perverted book’, thus conɹrming Basil’s lament that art is too

often regarded as a mode of autobiography.

MAGIC PAINTINGS

While the theme of a young man selling his soul in exchange for

eternal youth is not new – as Wilde confesses, it is ‘an idea that is

old in the history of literature’ (Mason, 72) – The Picture of Dorian

Gray oʃers an intriguing and highly original treatment of this idea,

principally owing to Wilde’s brilliant conceit of the portrait which

masks Dorian’s life. This is not to suggest that magic, animated, or

somehow revealing portraits were unknown in the pages of popular

literature; they had been a stock feature of fantastic ɹction since its

earliest days. One of the marvellous and terrifying events which

takes place in Horace Walpole’s The Castle of Otranto (1764; the ɹrst

Gothic novel) is the ɹgure of Alfonso stepping down from his

portrait, a portentous sign that Manfred’s days at the castle are

numbered. A little-known (and decidedly extravagant) tale from

1812 entitled ‘Family Portraits’, by Jean Baptiste Benoît Eyries,

which owes much to Walpole’s novel, also anticipates aspects of

Wilde’s own magic portrait.18 In Eyries’ tale, the portrait of the evil

Ditmar is imbued with moral signiɹcance as manifested in its

physical appearance. It was painted by a ghost as an emblem of

Ditmar’s crimes, depicting his soul in all its ugliness; and, as in the

denouement of Wilde’s tale, it reverts to a more attractive form once

expiation for these sins is accomplished. The idea of a fatal

correspondence between a painting and an individual’s life – the

former being parasitic of the latter–had been brilliantly handled in

Edgar Allan Poe’s story, ‘The Oval Portrait’ (1845), where the

sittings for her portrait.

Portraits proliferate in Victorian Gothic and sensational novels,

revealing dark secrets about their subjects.19 Wilde’s novel follows

suit, featuring not one revelatory portrait merely, but a number of

earlier ones which, it is suggested, have some link to their pictorial

descendant. Chapter XI of the 1891 version tells how Dorian would

visit the portrait gallery of his country house and contemplate the

pictures of his ancestors. Each one has a tale to tell, encouraging

Dorian to speculate on the ‘inheritance of sin and shame’

bequeathed to him by those whose ‘blood ɻowed in his veins’.

Standing before a particular portrait he wonders whether it was

‘young Herbert’s life that he sometimes led? Had some strange

Was it some dim sense of that ruined grace that had made him so

suddenly, and almost without cause, give utterance, in Basil

Hallward’s studio, to the mad prayer that had so changed his life?’

This is a powerful and intriguing suggestion, providing a ‘Gothic’

(but also scientiɹc) explanation for Dorian’s actions. It suggests that

he is haunted by his ancestral legacies rather than being entirely

motivated by his own personal vanity. His portrait therefore bears

not only the consequences of Dorian’s own sins, but is also the

culmination of an ancestral line. For as Dorian reasons, ‘man’ was ‘a

complex, multiform creature that bore within itself strange legacies

monstrous maladies of the dead’.

Through such emphases Wilde gives a fantastic and supernatural

momentary ɻash of expression of the sort which will be found

latent faces of ancestors, beneath every character their characters.’20

Wilde supernaturalizes scientiɹc belief, providing an occult

dimension to the correspondence between physical appearance and

character, and the transference of ancestral legacy. This scientiɹc

frame of reference is conspicuous in his novel, especially in its

revised form, where heredity plays a crucial role in explaining

character and motivation. Wilde added a whole chapter in 1891

(Chapter III) to provide some details about Dorian’s immediate

ancestry. Here we learn that his maternal grandfather was ‘a mean

dog’ who is suspected of bringing about Dorian’s father’s death. His

mother, who had married beneath her (thus invoking her father’s

revenge), makes an appearance in the portrait gallery in the revised

version, thus reinforcing the suggestion that heredity in part

explains Dorian’s own actions. Dorian resembles his mother

physically (Chapter XI), while the transformed portrait starts to

resemble the wicked grandfather: ‘There would be the wrinkled

throat, the cold, blue-veined hands, the twisted body, that he

Dorian’s moral responsibility for his actions. As the narrator puts it:

or for what the world calls sin, so dominates a nature, that every

ɹbre of the body, as every cell of the brain, seems to be instinct with

debate on ‘Responsibility in Mental Disease’ (the title of an

important work on the subject), and how forms of criminality were

a consequence of ‘degenerate’ ancestry similar to Dorian’s.21 For as

Wilde’s Vivian would assert in ‘The Critic as Artist’, also published

in 1891: ‘the scientiɹc principle of Heredity… has shown us that we

are never less free than when we try to act. It has hemmed us round

with the nets of the hunter, and written upon the wall the prophecy

of our doom. We may not watch it, for it is within us. We may not

see it, save in a mirror that mirrors the soul.’22 As Dorian’s portrait

is at one point referred to as ‘the most magical of mirrors…[which]

would reveal to him his own soul’ (Chapter VIII), it can be suggested

that heredity provides a key to his actions and a scientiɹc

alternative to the ‘moral’ emphasis which Wilde complained was too

‘obvious’ in the 1890 version of the novel.

VISIBLE VICES

This scientiɹc dimension to Dorian Gray suggests that it is really

only the impossible conceit of the portrait’s transformation that

makes Wilde’s tale supernatural or fantastic.23 The central motif is

framed and informed by so much that was materialistic and

plausible in contemporary thought. This also applies to the notion of

bodily metamorphosis and the physical consequences of ‘moral’

causes, a belief that is fundamental to Wilde’s narrative. Once again,

what happens to the portrait is only fantastic because it happens to

canvas and paint rather than ɻesh and blood. The belief that

underlies this transference was far from implausible at the time.

Physiognomy – the widespread belief that an individual’s

appearance, particularly his or her face, reveals character – plays an

important part in Wilde’s novel. A version of this logic is ɹrst

encountered in its opening pages. Here Lord Henry expresses the

hope that Dorian’s extraordinary good looks are not matched by

intelligence. For as he reasons: ‘Intellect is in itself a mode of

exaggeration, and destroys the harmony of any face. The moment

refers were usually understood to be ɹxed, and certainly not

somewhat ɻippant discussion of physiognomic ideas of course

physical consequences. And yet this belief also had currency in some

contemporary scientiɹc and pseudo-scientiɹc writings, writings

which help to explain the central conceit of Wilde’s ‘fantastic’ tale.

Basil articulates a version of this logic in Chapter XII when he

confronts Dorian with the rumours that have been gathering about

his life. As Basil reasons: ‘Sin is a thing that writes itself across a

vices. There are no such things. If a wretched man has a vice, it

shows itself in the lines of his mouth, the droop of his eyelids, the

moulding of his hands even.’ It is this logic that allows Basil and

from cheap pamphlets sold by quack practitioners to serious

the informed could identify. Indeed, as Samuel Tissot, the most

inɻuential authority on the subject, asserts of those who are

‘addicted’ to the practice and are exposed to its supposed

consequences: ‘When the vail [sic] is withdrawn, the picture of their

conduct appears in the most hideous light… it is a frightful picture,

and makes one shudder.’24 As Tissot’s pictorial imagery suggests,

Wilde’s narrative operates within a similar framework of

expectations about certain secret vices and their ‘frightful’

consequences. Again, it is only the supernatural intervention in this

process that inhibits what was eminently plausible to a large section

Dorian’s sins, whatever they might be.

THE PORTRAIT

The portrait of Dorian may be the vehicle for a fantastic plot

device, the repository for ancestral memory, a metaphor or mask for

erotic desire, or the alibi for a life of secret vices; but it is also a

work of art, and therefore occupies an important place in Wilde’s

text and oetime. For Wilde made his public debut as a ‘professor of

aesthetics’, and made art, its relation to life and conduct, and its

correct interpretation, the dominant theme of most of his writings

and public pronouncements. These concerns are explored in Dorian

Gray, a novel in which a painting rather than its subject is the

eponymous character.

From the ɹrst pages, Basil’s painting is the object of

interpretation and potential misreading. Basil, its creator, is also its

ɹrst interpreter. As seen earlier, he believes that his portrait of

Dorian actually reveals more about himself than the sitter. As he

protests: ‘We live in an age when men treat art as if it were meant to

be a form of autobiography’; and because he believes the portrait

reveals ‘the secret of [his] own soul’ he resolves not to exhibit it.

the novel: ‘It is the spectator, and not life, that art really mirrors.’

Works of art therefore act as subjective mirrors in Wilde’s novel.

recording his transgressions according to the pseudo-scientiɹc

subjectively, is ɹrst and foremost a ‘critic’ of his own portrait. When

actions he is once again reading his own life into a work of art:

‘Such things were impossible. It seemed monstrous even to think of

cruelty in the mouth. Cruelty! Had he been cruel?’ (Chapter VII).

Given Wilde’s professed views on art and nature, art and life, and

art and morality, it is signiɹcant that Dorian’s ‘monstrous’ reading is

the central incidents of Dorian Gray.

Wilde’s ‘The Decay of Lying’ (January 1889) is principally a

probable, uninteresting human life’, while asserting that ‘All bad art

comes from returning to Life and Nature, and elevating them to

ideals.’ For Wilde, art should be ‘a veil, rather than a mirror’.25

These strictures against bringing life to art ɹnd their ‘moral’

counterpart in Wilde’s portrait of the art critic and poisoner,

Thomas Griɽths Wainewright, ‘Pen, Pencil and Poison’ (January

1889). Here he makes one of his ɹrst assaults on the tendency to

bring ethics to aesthetics: ‘The fact of a man being a poisoner is

nothing against his prose. The domestic virtues are not the true

basis of art, though they may serve as an excellent advertisement for

second-rate artists.’26 Such views would become central to Wilde’s

thought, being the principal theme of his Preface to the revised

edition of his novel, and in many of his works of criticism published

subsequent to it. As he protested to the reviewer of the St James’s

Gazette: ‘The sphere of art and the sphere of ethics are absolutely

distinct and separate.’ For Wilde, art is superior to nature and to

life, and aesthetics are always higher than ethics. However,

although his most forthright statements on this theme appeared as a

consequence of his experience with the critics of his novel

(especially those dealing with art and morality), the earlier works

referred to above indicate that Wilde held these views prior to its

art with life, and ethics with aesthetics. The result is disastrous for

This is a fault.’

A similar illustration of the disastrous eʃects of life on art, and

whom he discovers performing in a seedy, third-class theatre. From

the outset it is clear that he is in love with Sibyl’s acting rather than

Imogen… and tomorrow night she will be Juliet.’ ‘When is she Sibyl

‘take [his] love out of poetry, and to ɹnd a wife in Shakespeare’s

plays… I have had the arms of Rosalind around me, and kissed

Juliet on the mouth.’ Sibyl plays all the great romantic heroines of

the Shakespearean stage, and while she remains within the sphere of

art her performance enraptures Dorian. ‘Life’, in the form of the real

(Chapter VII). Dorian’s cruel response is consistent with his aesthetic

the ɹrst changes in his portrait.

However, despite the moral censure suggested by the portrait’s

artiɹciality of Sibyl and her experiences. As Dorian exclaims to Lord

Henry, ‘How extraordinarily dramatic life is! If I had read all this in

a book, Harry, I think I would have wept over it. Somehow, now

for tears.’ How is the reader, who does read about Sibyl’s death in a

book, supposed to respond? Perhaps Lord Henry’s interpretation

points the way:

‘… you must think of that lonely death in the tawdry dressing-room simply as a strange

lurid fragment from some Jacobean tragedy, as a wonderful scene from Webster, or Ford,

or Cyril Tourneur. The girl never really lived, and so she never really died…. Mourn for

Ophelia, if you like. Put ashes on your head because Cordelia was strangled…. But don’t

waste your tears over Sibyl Vane. She was less real than they are.’ (Chapter VIII)

Henry is being true to his cynical and amoral self, but he is

actually speaking the literal truth, and oʃering a view that is

she once played the melodramatic stage, constantly adopting

is also characterized in this way. As Sybil exclaims: ‘Oh, don’t be so

serious, Jim. You are like one of the heroes of those silly

Shalott when she complains, ‘I have grown sick of shadows.’ This all

points to her artiɹciality as a creation, suggesting that an ‘aesthetic’

rather than sentimental response to her death – for Dorian ‘one of

the great romantic tragedies of the age’ – is more appropriate. In

depicting the experiences of Dorian and Sibyl in this way, Wilde

provides an illustration of the basic tenets he propounded in his

statements on art – that art is destroyed by life and morality, and

that ethics and aesthetics belong to separate spheres of thought and

judgement. His novel is in part an allegory of interpretation, and an

essay in critical conduct.

conscience and corruption can also be understood in both

Henry’s cultivated cynicism and adopts the course of amoral

hedonism the dandy prescribes, nevertheless is compelled to believe

that ‘The soul is a terrible reality. It can be bought, and sold, and

each one of us. I know it’ (Chapter XIX). It is a powerful and

disturbing conceit that Wilde employs to depict this recognition:

… the portrait that Basil Hallward had painted of him would be a guide to him through

life, would be to him what holiness is to some, and conscience to others, and the fear of

God to us all.… here was a visible symbol of the degradation of sin. Here was an ever-

present sign of the ruin men brought upon their souls. (Chapter VIII)

Dorian decides to ignore the lesson provided by this recognition,

choosing to believe that the portrait would free him fromthe

consequences of his actions. But Dorian is never free. Thus despite

his worship of and unbridled indulgence in pleasure, he cannot

escape from his fascination with the portrait, constantly examining

or the most ascetic anchorite.

He grew more and more enamoured of his own beauty, more and more interested in the

corruption of his own soul. He would examine with minute care, and sometimes with a

monstrous and terrible delight, the hideous lines that seared the wrinkling forehead or

crawled around the heavy sensual mouth, wondering sometimes which were the more

horrible, the signs of sin or the signs of age. (Chapter XI)

‘Conscience’ (whether one reads that in sacred or secular terms)

is strongly delineated in the novel. Dorian believes that he has

destroyed conscience, but in truth it destroys him. The portrait

had kept him awake at night. When he had been away, he had been ɹlled with terror lest

other eyes should look upon it. It had brought melancholy across his passions. Its mere

memory had marred many moments of joy. It had been like conscience to him. Yes, it had

been conscience. He would destroy it. (Chapter XX)

Thus although the central conceit of the physical consequences

of certain acts is informed by beliefs peculiar to the time, Wilde’s

depiction of how this process aʃects Dorian has the power to

fascinate and chill readers in an age that has discarded such beliefs,

and can recognize in such descriptions an outline of what now

might be termed ‘paranoia’. Dorian Gray is in part an acute study of

obsession and psychological collapse, depicting a mind destroying

itself with its own obsessions.

The Picture of Dorian Gray is therefore a work that can be read in

a number of ways. It is an enduring parable on the corruption of the

soul and a study of psychological collapse, a compendium of the

beliefs of its period, and an exercise in literary decadence,

conspicuous in its exotica and esoteria, and deɹning the Zeitgeist of

the stage. In Chapter XV Lord Henry observes of Madame de Ferrol,

‘She is still décolletée… and when she is in a very smart gown she looks like an edition de

luxe of a bad French novel. She is really wonderful, and full of surprises. Her capacity for

family aʃection is extraordinary. When her third husband died, her hair turned quite gold

from grief

Wilde recycled this line for The Importance of Being Earnest, a

practice he repeated often at this time. Such passages signiɹcantly

enrich the novel, making it a more enjoyable and durable work of

art, of comparable stature to anything he produced for the stage.

Lady Windermere’s Fan (1892), which also re-uses epigrams from

the novel, appeared the year after the revised version of Dorian Gray

and launched Wilde’s extraordinarily successful career as a

dramatist. At the time of his public downfall he had two plays

playing to packed audiences in the West End. His ostracism was

swift and conclusive. First his name was taken from the hoardings of

An Ideal Husband and The Importance of Being Earnest, soon both

plays were taken oʃ, and an imminent US tour of A Woman of No

Importance was promptly cancelled. On 25 May 1895 he was

sentenced to two years’ imprisonment with hard labour; in

November he was declared bankrupt. His wife changed her name to

Holland, and on his release from Reading gaol Wilde changed his

England for ever. He died in poverty in Paris in November 1900.

And yet today Wilde’s plays have never been more popular with

the best-selling titles in the Penguin Classics series. If Dorian Gray

does have a ‘moral’ we can perhaps ɹnd it in its ɹnal paragraph: the

shamed obscurity, and ɹnally physical harm, remains intact in all its

beauty and wonder.

NOTES

1 Wilde’s Poems were published at his own expense by David Bogue;

these he reissued with a few corrections the following year. They

were not a critical success, being considered pale imitations or

wanton plagiarisms of Keats, Tennyson, Rossetti, Arnold and

Swinburne. As Punch put it, ‘The Poet is Wilde,/But the poetry’s

tame’. Wilde’s ɹrst play, Vera; or, The Nihilists, was produced by

Marie Prescott, who also played the title role, in August 1883 at the

Union Square Theater in New York. It played there for only eight

days, but later toured.

2 Similarly, in an editorial note in response to Wilde’s defence of his

novel in that paper, the St James’s Gazette for 27 June 1890 asserted

that this book ‘constantly hints, and not obscurely, at disgusting sins

taken from this source.

3 For material from the trials, see Hyde, The Trials of Oscar Wilde

in this edition), in ‘The Critic as Artist’ and in ‘The Soul of Man

Under Socialism’, both published in 1891.

4 See Richard Ellmann’s excellent biography, Oscar Wilde (1987),

304. Although Wilde might have been having fun at his editor’s

expense here.

5 Hyde, Trials, 38. The fact that Wilde assents to the designation

‘English gentleman’ here is signiɹcant; Wilde the Irishman and

wordsmith clearly had his ɹngers crossed behind his back.

6 Ellmann, 261.

7 Wilde’s conɻation of ‘culture and corruption’, and the association

between art and crime, was very much in line with the views of a

number of contemporary thinkers and could even be considered

‘commonsensical’ at the time. For a start, a broad section of the

middle classes would not be surprised to see the aristocracy and the

so-called ‘criminal classes’, the idle rich and the underclass, put on a

want and failure…. Comfort-worship in the West leads to

criminals is at once an intellectual and emotional fact…. They share

this character with a large proportion of artists and literary men.

[Extreme vanity] marks the abnormal man, the man of unbalanced

mental organization, artist or criminal’ (139). That such views were

not conɹned to ‘specialists’ is suggested by the fact that the Scots

Observer pointed out that if Wilde’s ‘assumption of vanity’ (displayed

in Dorian Gray and in his defence of it) was sincere it would

‘betoken either the madman or the criminal’ (Mason, 134).

8 Algernon explains to Jack (or Ernest when he is in town) the

principles of Bunburying in Act I of The Importance of Being Earnest:

ALGERNON: You have invented a very useful young brother called Ernest, in order

that you may be able to come up to town as often as you like. I have invented an

invaluable permanent invalid called Bunbury, in order that I may be able to go down

into the country whenever I choose. Bunbury is perfectly invaluable. 

… Nothing will induce me to part with Bunbury, and if you ever get married, which

seems to me extremely problematic, you will be very glad to know Bunbury. A man

who marries without knowing Bunbury has a very tedious time of it.

9 Vivian’s complaint in ‘The Decay of Lying’ that ‘the transformation

of Dr Jekyll reads dangerously like something out of the Lancet [a

medical paper]’ is testimony to its imaginative appeal for Wilde.

10 Stevenson, The Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde and Other

Tales of Terror, edited by Robert Mighall (Penguin: Harmondsworth,

2002), 60.

11 The statute which convicted Wilde was an amendment to an Act

‘to make further provision for the Protection of Women and Girls,

the suppression of brothels and other purposes’. The principal aim of

the Act was to protect young girls from the exploitation of brothel-

keepers who ran a ‘trade’ in virgins, when it raised the age of

consent from thirteen to sixteen years. Section 11, however, dealt

with intimate acts between male persons, a more precise legal

proscription of homosexual activities than had hitherto been

enacted. The Act outlawed any and all ‘acts of gross indecency with

another male person’, whether in public or private, and carried a

maximum sentence of two years with hard labour, Wilde’s own

sentence. On Wilde’s experience of blackmail, see Ellmann, 362,

366–7.

Street one of these days’ (Ellmann, 303).

13 When asked what the ɻower meant, Wilde answered, ‘Nothing

whatever, but that is just what nobody will guess.’ There are some

written by Robert Hitchens, an acquaintance of Wilde and also a

Douglas, was entitled The Green Carnation. It was published in 1894,

but withdrawn at the time of Wilde’s trials a year later.

14 In 1883 the homosexual apologist John Addington Symonds

privately printed A Problem in Greek Ethics, where he argued that

‘the Dorians gave the earliest and the most marked encouragement

to Greek love. Nowhere else, indeed, except among the Dorians… do

we meet with pederastia developed as an institution.’ For him,

‘Greek love took its origins in Doris’ (reproduced in Ellis and

Symonds, Sexual Inversion, 1897). See Espey, ‘Resources for Wilde

Studies at the Clark Library’, in Oscar Wilde, Two Approaches: Papers

Read at a Clark Library Seminar, ed. Ellmann and Espey (1977).

16 On these revisions, see Lawler, ‘Oscar Wilde’s First Manuscript of

The Picture of Dorian Gray’ (1972), 125–35; and Lawler, An Inquiry

into Oscar Wilde’s Revisions of ‘‘The Picture of Dorian Gray’’ (1988).

What Dorian Gray’s sins are no one knows. He who ɹnds themhas

brought them’ (Mason, 81).

18 Eyries, Tales of the Dead: The Ghost Stories of the Villa Diodati,

translated by Terry Hale (1992). ‘Family Portraits’ was read by

Byron, the Shelleys and John Polidori during their famous residence

at the Villa Diodati in Switzerland, which resulted in Mary Shelley’s

Frankenstein and Polidori’s The Vampire. On the Villa Diodati and

what it produced, see Frayling, Nightmare: The Birth of Horror (1996)

and Vampyres: Lord Byron to Count Dracula (1992).

19 Perhaps the most famous ‘revelatory’ portrait from nineteenth-

century ɹction is that described by Nathaniel Hawthorne in The

House of the Seven Gables (1851), where the portrait of the original

Pyncheon reveals a moral and physical resemblance between its

subject and his descendant Judge Jaʃrey, allowing the narrative to

reɻect on hereditary transmission and to warn against repeating the

past. A more recent model for Wilde was Mary Elizabeth Braddon’s

Lady Audley’s Secret (1862), where a hidden portrait allows George

Gothic Fiction (1999), Chapter 3.

the reign of Queen Elizabeth is liable to be revived in ourselves The

attested by portraits, but moral character of a normal kind… can

scarcely be traced beyond the third generation’ (Nisbet, Marriage

and Heredity (1889), 106–7).

21 Henry Maudsley, the major British exponent of what was called

‘degeneration’ theory, published Responsibility in Mental Disease in

1874. Maudsley was a materialist who argued that criminals were

largely a product of their hereditary makeup, or were (evolutionary)

throwbacks to more primitive forms of humanity. These ideas,

deriving from French ‘alienists’ of the mid-nineteenth century, came

hinted at Wilde’s sexuality, at least not in the ɹrst edition.

22 ‘The Critic as Artist’, Complete Works (1994), 1137.

23 And even this aspect is subjected to scientiɹc scrutiny by Dorian.

As he reasons: ‘Had it indeed been prayer that had produced the

substitution? Might there not be some curious scientiɹc reason for it

all? If thought could exercise its inɻuence upon a living organism,

might not thought exercise an inɻuence upon dead and inorganic

things?’ (Chapter VIII).

24 The ɹrst quote is from Acton, The Functions and Disorders of the

Reproductive Organs (1865), 67; the second from Spitzka, ‘Cases of

Masturbation (Mastur-batic Insanity)’ (1888), 34, 52; the third from

Tiss ot, A Treatise on the Diseases Produced by Onanism (1760; 1832),

51, 86. On this literature, its ‘Gothic’ elements and its possible

contribution to Dorian Gray, see Mighall (1999), Chapter 5.

25 Complete Works (1994), 1082, 1091.

26 ibid., 1106.

CHRONOLOGY

1854 Oscar Fingal O’Flahertie Wilde born (he added ‘Wills’ in the

1870s) on 16 October at 21 Westland Row, Dublin.

1855 His family move to 1 Merrion Square in Dublin.

1857 Birth of Isola Wilde, Oscar’s sister.

1858 Birth of Constance Mary Lloyd, Wilde’s future wife.

1864 Wilde’s father is knighted following his appointment as

Queen Victoria’s ‘Surgeon Oculist’ the previous year. Wilde

attends Portora Royal School, Enniskillen.

1867 Death of Isola Wilde. 1871– 4 At Trinity College, Dublin,

reading Classics and Ancient History.

1874–

At Magdalen College, Oxford, reading Classics and Ancient

History (‘Greats’).

1875 Travels in Italy with his tutor from Dublin, J. P. Mahaʃy.

1876 First poems published in Dublin University Magazine. Death of

Sir William Wilde.

1877 Further travels in Italy, and in Greece.

1878 Wins the Newdigate Prize for Poetry in Oxford with

‘Ravenna’. Takes a double ɹrst from Oxford. Moves to

London and starts to establish himself as a popularizer of

Aestheticism.

1879 Meets Constance Lloyd.

1881 Poemspublished at his own expense; not well received

critically.

1882 Lecture tour of North America, speaking on art, aesthetics

and decoration. Revised edition of Poems published.

1883 His ɹrst play, Vera; or, The Nihilists performed in New York;

it is not a success.

1884 Marries Constance Lloyd in London, honeymoon in Paris and

Dieppe.

1885 Moves into 16 Tite Street, Chelsea. Cyril Wilde born.

1886 Vyvyan Wilde born. Meets Robert Ross, to become his

lifelong friend and, in 1897, his literary executor. Ross might

have been Wilde’s ɹrst homosexual lover.

1887 Becomes the editor of Lady’s World: A Magazine of Fashion

and Society, and changes its name to Woman’s World.

Publication of‘The Canterville Ghost’ and ‘Lord Arthur

Savile’s Crime’.

1888 The Happy Prince and Other Tales published; on the whole

well-received.

1889 ‘Pen, Pencil and Poison’ (on the forger and poisoner Thomas

Griɽths Wainewright), ‘The Decay of Lying’ (a dialogue in

praise of artiɹce over nature and art over morality), ‘The

Portrait of Mr W.H.’ (on the supposed identity of the

dedicatee of Shakespeare’s sonnets) all published.

1890 The Picture of Dorian Gray published in the July number of

Lippincott’s Monthly Magazine; ɹerce debate between Wilde

and hostile critics ensues. ‘The True Function and Value of

Criticism’ (later revised and included in Intentions as ‘The

Critic as Artist’) published.

1891 Wilde’s ɹrst meeting with Lord Alfred Douglas (‘Bosie’). The

Duchess of Padua performed in New York. ‘The Soul of Man

Under Socialism’ and ‘Preface to Dorian Gray’ published in

February and March in the Fortnightly Review. The revised

and extended edition of The Picture of Dorian Gray published

by Ward, Lock and Company in April. Intentions (collection

of critical essays), Lord Arthur Savile’s Crime and Other Stories

and A House of Pomegranates (fairy-tales) published.

1892 Lady Windermere’s Fan performed at St James’s Theatre,

London (February to July).

1893 Salome published in French. A Woman of No Importance

performed at Haymarket Theatre, London.

1894 Salome published in English with illustrations by Aubrey

Beardsley; Douglas is the dedicatee. The Sphinx, a poem with

illustrations by Charles Ricketts, published.

1895 An Ideal Husband opens at Haymarket Theatre in January; it

is followed by the hugely successful The Importance of Being

Earnest at St James’s Theatre in February. On 28 February

Wilde returns to his club, the Albemarle, to ɹnd a card from

Douglas’s father, the Marquess of Queensberry, accusing

Wilde of ‘posing as a somdomite’ (sodomite). Wilde quickly

takes out an action accusing Queensberry of criminal libel.

In April Queensberry appears at the Old Bailey and is

acquitted, following a successful plea of justiɹcation on the

basis that Wilde was guilty of homosexual behaviour. Wilde

is immediately arrested, after ignoring his friends’ advice to

ɻee the country. In May he is tried twice at the Old Bailey,

and on 25 May sentenced to two years’ imprisonment with

hard labour for ‘acts of gross indecency with another male

person’. In July he is sent to Wandsworth Prison. In

November he is declared bankrupt, and shortly afterwards

transferred to Reading Gaol.

1896 Death of Wilde’s mother, Lady Jane Francesca Wilde

(‘Speranza’).

1897 Wilde writes the long letter to Douglas that would be later

entitled ‘De Profundis’. In May Wilde is released from prison,

and sails for Dieppe by the night ferry. He never returns to

Britain.

1898 The Ballad of Reading Gaol published pseudonymously as

C.3.3, Wilde’s cell-number in Reading Gaol. Wilde moves to

Paris in February. Constance Wilde (who had by now

changed her name to Holland) dies.

1899 Willie (b. 1852), Wilde’s elder brother, dies.

1900 In January Queensberry dies. By July Wilde himself is very

ill with a blood infection. On 29 November he is received

into the Roman Catholic Church, and dies on 30 November

in the Hotel d’Alsace in Paris.

1905 An abridged version of De Profundis, edited by Robert Ross,

published.

1908 The Collected Works, edited by Robert Ross, are published.

FURTHER READING

Editions and Collections

Wilde, Oscar, The Picture of Dorian Gray (1890 edition with 1891),

ed. Donald L. Lawler (W. W. Norton & Co.: New York, 1987).

—, The Complete Works of Oscar Wilde (Harper Collins: Glasgow,

1994).

—, The Uncollected Oscar Wilde, ed.John Wysejackson (Fourth

Estate: London, 1991).

—, The Fireworks of Oscar Wilde, ed. Owen Dudley Edwards

(Barrie &Jenkins: London, 1989).

—, The Importance of Being Earnest and Other Plays, ed. Richard

Gave (Penguin: Harmondsworth, 2000).

—, Nothing Except My Genius, ed. Alastair Rolfe (Penguin:

Harmondsworth, 1997).

Letters and Biographies

Hart-Davies, Rupert (ed.), Letters of Oscar Wilde (Rupert Hart-

Davies: London, 1962).

—, Selected Letters of Oscar Wilde (Oxford University Press:

Oxford, 1979).

—, More Letters of Oscar Wilde (John Murray: London, 1985).

Holland, Merlin and Rupert Hart-Davies, The Complete Letters of

Oscar Wilde (Fourth Estate: London, 2000).

Ellmann, Richard, Oscar Wilde (Penguin: Harmondsworth, 1987).

Harris, Frank, Oscar Wilde (Constable & Co.: London, 1938).

Jullian, Philippe, Oscar Wilde (Paladin: London, 1971).

Montgomery Hyde, H., The Trials of Oscar Wilde (William Hodge &

Co.: London, 1948).

Pearson, Hesketh, The Life of Oscar Wilde (Methuen & Co.:

London, 1954).

Roditi, Edouard, Oscar Wilde (New Directions: New York, 1986).

Criticism

Bartlett, Neil, Who Was That Man? A Present for Mr Oscar Wilde

(Serpent’s Tail: London, 1988).

Beckson, Karl (ed.), Oscar Wilde: The Critical Heritage (Routledge:

London, 1970).

—, An Oscar Wilde Encyclopedia (AMS: Ann Arbor, Mich., 1998).

Bloom, Harold (ed.), Oscar Wilde (Chelsea: New York, 1985).

Bowlby, Rachel, ‘Promoting Dorian Gray’, Oxford Literary Review 9

(1987), 147–63.

Cohen, Ed, Talk on the Wilde Side: Toward a Genealogy of a

Discourse on Male Sexualities (Routledge: New York and London,

1993).

Danson, Lawrence, Wilde’s Intentions: The Artist in his Criticism

(Oxford University Press: Oxford, 1997).

Espey, John, ‘Resources for Wilde Studies at the Clark Library’, in

Richard Ellmann andjohn Espey (eds.), Oscar Wilde, Two

Approaches: Papers Read at a Clark Library Seminar (William

Andrews Clark Memorial Library: Los Angeles, Calif, 1977).

Gagnier, Regenia, Idylls of the Marketplace: Oscar Wilde and the

Victorian Public (Scolar Press: Aldershot, 1986).

Goodman, Jonathan (ed.), The Oscar Wilde File (a collection of

newspaper accounts of Wilde’s trials) (Allison & Busby: London,

1988).

Hassler, Terri A., ‘The Physiological Determinism Debate in Oscar

Wilde’s The Picture of Dorian Gray, Victorian Newsletter 84

(1993), 31–5.

Lawler, Donald L., ‘Oscar Wilde's First Manuscript of The Picture of

Dorian Gray’, Studies in Bibliography 25 (1972), 125–35.

—, An Inquiry into Oscar Wilde’s Revisions of ‘The Picture of Dorian

Gray’ (Garland: New York, 1988).

Lawler, Donald L., and Charles E. Knott, ‘The Context of

Invention: Suggested Origins of Dorian Gray’, Modern Philology

(1976), 389–98.

Mason, Stuart (Christopher Millard), Oscar Wilde, Art and

Morality: A record of the discussion which followed the publication

of Dorian Gray’ (Frank Palmer: London, 1907; revised 1912).

Mikhail, E. H., Oscar Wilde: An Annotated Bibliography of Criticism

(London, 1978).

Moore-Gilbert, B.J., ‘Oscar Wilde and Reader-Response Criticism’,

in Gary Day (ed.), The British Critical Tradition: A Re-evaluation

(Macmillan: Basingstoke, 1993), 49–66.

Page, Norman, An Oscar Wilde Chronology (London, 1991).

Powell, Kerry, ‘Tom, Dick and Dorian Gray: Magic Picture Mania

in Late Victorian Fiction’, Philological Quarterly 62 (1982), 147–

70.

Raby, Peter, Oscar Wilde (Cambridge University Press: Cambridge,

1988).

Sinɹeld, Alan, The Wilde Century: Eʃeminacy, Oscar Wilde and the

Queer Moment (Cassell: London, 1994).

Background to Wilde’s Novel

Acton, William, Functions and Disorders of the Reproductive Organs,

4th edn. (John Churchill & Sons: London, 1865).

Arata, Stephen D., Fictions of Loss in the Victorian Fin de Sìcle’

(Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, 1996).

Baudelaire, Charles, Selected Poems, trans. Carol Clark (Penguin:

Harmondsworth, 1995).

Beckson, Karl (ed.), Aesthetes and Decadents of the i8gos: An

Anthology of British Poetry and Prose (Academy Chicago

Publishers: Chicago, 1982).

Chamberlin, J. E., Ripe was the Drowsy Hour: The Age of Oscar

Wilde (New York, 1977).

Dowling, Linda, Language and Decadence in the Victorian Fin de

Siècle (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1989).

Ellis, Henry Havelock, The Criminal (Walter Scott: London, 1890).

Ellis, Henry Havelock, and John Addington Symonds, Sexual

Inversion (Wilson & Macmillan: London, 1897).

Eyries, Jean Baptiste Benoit (trans. and ed. Terry Hale), Tales of

the Dead: The Ghost Stories of the Villa Diodati (Gothic Society:

Chislehurst, 1992).

Fletcher, Ian (ed.), Decadence and the i8gos (Edward Arnold:

London, 1979).

Flint, Kate, The Victorian Novelist: Social Problems and Social

Change (Groom Helm: London, 1987).

Frayling, Christopher, Vampyres: From Lord Byron to Count Dracula

(Faber and Faber: London, 1992).

—, Nightmare: The Birth of Horror (BBC Books: London, 1996).

Gaunt, William, The Aesthetic Adventure (Jonathan Gape: London,

1945).

Gibbons, Tom, Rooms at the Darwin Hotel: Studies in English Literary

Criticism and Ideas, 1880–1920 (Nedlands University Press:

Western Australia, 1973).

Greenslade, William, Degeneration, Culture and the Novel, 1880–

1940 (Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, 1994).

Huysmans, Joris-Karl, Against Nature, trans. Robert Baldick (1884;

Penguin: Harmondsworth, 1959).

Jackson, Holbrook, The Eighteen Nineties (1913; Pelican:

Harmondsworth, 1939).

Kraʃt-Ebing, Richard von, Psychopathia Sexualis (1886; F. A. Davis

& Co.: Philadelphia, 1892).

Le Gallienne, Richard, The Romantic ’gos (Robin Clark: London,

1993).

Maudsley, Henry, Pathology of Mind, 3rd edn. (Macmillan:

London, 1895).

Mighall, Robert, A Geography of Victorian Gothic Fiction: Mapping

History’s Nightmares (Oxford University Press: Oxford, 1999).

Milligan, Barry, Pleasures and Pains: Opium and the Orient in

Nineteenth-Century British Culture (University of Virginia Press:

Charlottesville, 1995).

Nisbet, J. F., Marriage and Heredity: A View of Psychological

Evolution (Ward & Downey, 1889).

Nordau, Max Simon, Degeneration (1892; English translation 1895;

Nebraska University Press: Lincoln and London, 1993).

Spitzka, Edward Charles, ‘Cases of Masturbation (Masturbatic

Insanity)’, Journal of Mental Science 34 (1888), 52—61.

Stokes, John, In the Nineties (Harvester-Wheatsheaf: Hemel

Hempstead, 1989).

Sweet, Matthew, Inventing the Victorians (Faber & Faber: London,

2001).

Thornton, R. K. R., The Decadent Dilemma (Edward Arnold:

London, 1983).

Tissot, Samuel, A Treatise on the Diseases Produced by Onanism,

trans. ‘A Physician’ (1760; Collins & Hannay: New York, 1832).

Tylor, Edward, Primitive Culture: Researches into the Development of

Mythology, Philosophy, Religion, Art and Custom, 2 vols. (John

Murray: London, 1871).

Von Eckardt, Wolf, Oilman, Sander L., and Ghamberlin, J.

Edward, Oscar Wilde’s London (Michael O’Mara: London, 1987).

White, Arnold, The Problems of a Great City (Remington & Co.:

London, 1886).

A NOTE ON THE TEXT

The text reproduced here is the ɹrst book edition (i volume),

published by Ward, Lock and Co. in 1891. Important textual

variants between this and the version published in Lippincott’s

Monthly Magazine (July issue) the previous year are given in the

Notes (the signiɹcance of these changes is discussed in the

Introduction). The revised version of the novel was both ‘censored’

and indisputably improved. The most signiɹcant changes involve

the degree of intimacy displayed by the male characters. In 1890

Basil tells Henry how he ‘worships’ Dorian, and begs him not to

‘take away the one person that makes life absolutely lovely to me’.

This becomes ‘the one person who gives my art whatever charm it

possesses: my life as an artist depends on him’. Art rather than love

is the principal concern of the Basil Hallward we meet in 1891.

Wilde also extended and enriched the novel in 1891. The

original thirteen chapters became twenty, the ɹnal chapter being

divided in two in 1891. The addition of chapters and long passages

involved the ɻeshing out of Dorian as a character, providing details

about his ancestry (Chapter III), and making his psychological

collapse more prolonged and more convincing. It also speciɹed

some of his shady activities, such as his trip to the opiumden in

great eʃect, making it a much funnier novel.

OceanofPDF.com

THE PREFACE1

The artist is the creator of beautiful things.

To reveal art and conceal the artist is art’s aim.

The critic is he who can translate into another manner

or a new material his impression of beautiful things.

The highest as the lowest form of criticism is a mode of

autobiography.

Those who ɹnd ugly meanings in beautiful things are

corrupt without being charming. This is a fault.

Those who ɹnd beautiful meanings in beautiful things

are the cultivated. For these there is hope.

They are the elect to whom beautiful things mean only

Beauty.

There is no such thing as a moral or an immoral book.

Books are well written, or badly written. That is all.

The nineteenth century dislike of Realism is the rage of

Caliban seeing his own face in a glass.

The nineteenth century dislike of Romanticism is the

rage of Caliban not seeing his own face in a glass.

The moral life of man forms part of the subject-matter

of the artist, but the morality of art consists in the perfect

use of an imperfect medium.

No artist desires to prove anything. Even things that are

true can be proved.

No artist has ethical sympathies. An ethical sympathy in

an artist is an unpardonable mannerism of style.

No artist is ever morbid. The artist can express

everything.

Thought and language are to the artist instruments of

an art.

Vice and virtue are to the artist materials for an art.

From the point of view of form, the type of all the arts

is the art of the musician. From the point of view of

feeling, the actor’s craft is the type.

All art is at once surface and symbol.

Those who go beneath the surface do so at their peril.

Those who read the symbol do so at their peril.

It is the spectator, and not life, that art really mirrors.

Diversity of opinion about a work of art shows that the

work is new, complex, and vital.

When critics disagree the artist is in accord with

himself.

We can forgive a man for making a useful thing as long

as he does not admire it. The only excuse for making a

useless thing is that one admires it intensely.

All art is quite useless.

OSCAR WILDE

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER I

The studio was ɹlled with the rich odour of roses, and when the

light summer wind stirred amidst the trees of the garden there came

through the open door the heavy scent of the lilac, or the more

delicate perfume of the pink-ɻowering thorn.

From the corner of the divan of Persian saddlebags on which he

was lying, smoking, as was his custom, innumerable cigarettes, Lord

Henry Wotton could just catch the gleam of the honey-sweet and

honey-coloured blossoms of a laburnum, whose tremulous branches

seemed hardly able to bear the burden of a beauty so ɻame-like as

theirs; and now and then the fantastic shadows of birds in ɻight

ɻitted across the long tussore-silk curtains that were stretched in

front of the huge window, producing a kind of momentary Japanese

eʃect,1 and making him think of those pallid jade-faced painters of

Tokio who, through the medium of an art that is necessarily

sullen murmur of the bees shouldering their way through the long

unmown grass, or circling with monotonous insistence round the

dusty gilt horns of the straggling woodbine, seemed to make the

stillness more oppressive. The dim roar of London was like the

bourdon note of a distant organ.

In the centre of the room, clamped to an upright easel, stood the

full-length portrait of a young man of extraordinary personal

beauty, and in front of it, some little distance away, was sitting the

to so many strange conjectures.

As the painter looked at the gracious and comely form he had so

he feared he might awake.

‘It is your best work, Basil, the best thing you have ever done,’

the Grosvenor. The Academy is too large and too vulgar.2 Whenever

I have gone there, there have been either so many people that I

have not been able to see the pictures, which was dreadful, or so

many pictures that I have not been able to see the people, which

was worse. The Grosvenor is really the only place.’

‘I don’t think I shall send it anywhere,’ he answered, tossing his

head back in that odd way that used to make his friends laugh at

him at Oxford. ‘No: I won’t send it anywhere.’

Lord Henry elevated his eyebrows, and looked at him in

amazement through the thin blue wreaths of smoke that curled up

in such fanciful whorls from his heavy opium-tainted cigarette. ‘Not

send it anywhere? My dear fellow, why? Have you any reason?

What odd chaps you painters are! You do anything in the world to

gain a reputation. As soon as you have one, you seem to want to

capable of any emotion.’

‘I know you will laugh at me,’ he replied, ‘but I really can’t

exhibit it. I have put too much of myself into it.’

Lord Henry stretched himself out on the divan and laughed.

‘Yes, I knew you would; but it is quite true, all the same.’

‘Too much of yourself in it! Upon my word, Basil, I didn’t know

you were so vain; and I really can’t see any resemblance between

you, with your rugged strong face and your coal-black hair, and this

young Adonis, who looks as if he was made out of ivory and rose-

leaves. Why, my dear Basil, he is a Narcissus,3 and you – well, of

course you have an intellectual expression, and all that. But beauty,

real beauty, ends where an intellectual expression begins. Intellect is

in itself a mode of exaggeration, and destroys the harmony of any

face. The moment one sits down to think, one becomes all nose, or

all forehead, or something horrid. Look at the successful men in any

of the learned professions. How perfectly hideous they are! Except,

of course, in the Church. But then in the Church they don’t think. A

bishop keeps on saying at the age of eighty what he was told to say

when he was a boy of eighteen, and as a natural consequence he

always looks absolutely delightful. Your mysterious young friend,

whose name you have never told me, but whose picture really

yourself, Basil: you are not in the least like him.’

‘You don’t understand me, Harry,’ answered the artist. ‘Of course

distinction, the sort of fatality that seems to dog through history the

They can sit at their ease and gape at the play. If they know nothing

they are – my art, whatever it may be worth; Dorian Gray’s good

looks – we shall all suʃer for what the gods have given us, suʃer

terribly.’

‘Dorian Gray? Is that his name?’ asked Lord Henry, walking

across the studio towards Basil Hallward.

‘Yes, that is his name. I didn’t intend to tell it to you.’

‘But why not?’

foolish about it?’

‘Not at all,’ answered Lord Henry, ‘not at all, my dear Basil. You

what I am doing. When we meet – we do meet occasionally, when

good at it – much better, in fact, than I am. She never gets confused

makes no row at all. I sometimes wish she would; but she merely

laughs at me.’

‘I hate the way you talk about your married life, Harry,’ said

Basil Hallward, strolling towards the door that led into the garden. ‘I

thing. Your cynicism is simply a pose.’

know,’ cried Lord Henry, laughing; and the two young men went

out into the garden together,4 and ensconced themselves on a long

bamboo seat that stood in the shade of a tall laurel bush. The

sunlight slipped over the polished leaves. In the grass, white daisies

were tremulous.

After a pause, Lord Henry pulled out his watch. ‘I am afraid I

must be going, Basil,’ he murmured, ‘and before I go, I insist on

your answering a question I put to you some time ago.’

‘What is that?’ said the painter, keeping his eyes ɹxed on the

ground.

‘You know quite well.’

‘I do not, Harry.’

‘Well, I will tell you what it is. I want you to explain to me why

you won’t exhibit Dorian Gray’s picture. I want the real reason.’

‘I told you the real reason.’

‘No, you did not. You said it was because there was too much of

yourself in it. Now, that is childish.’

‘Harry,’ said Basil Hallward, looking him straight in the face,

‘every portrait that is painted with feeling is a portrait of the artist,

not of the sitter. The sitter is merely the accident, the occasion. It is

not he who is revealed by the painter; it is rather the painter who,

secret of my own soul.’

Lord Henry laughed. ‘And what is that?’ he asked.

‘I will tell you,’ said Hallward; but an expression of perplexity

came over his face.

‘I am all expectation, Basil,’ continued his companion, glancing

at him.

‘Oh, there is really very little to tell, Harry,’ answered the

will hardly believe it.’

Lord Henry smiled, and, leaning down, plucked a pink-petalled

daisy from the grass, and examined it. ‘I am quite sure I shall

understand it,’ he replied, gazing intently at the little golden white-

feathered disk, ‘and as for believing things, I can believe anything,

provided that it is quite incredible.’

The wind shook some blossoms from the trees, and the heavy

lilac-blooms, with their clustering stars, moved to and fro in the

languid air. A grasshopper began to chirrup by the wall, and like a

blue thread a long thin dragon-ɻy ɻoated past on its brown gauze

wings. Lord Henry felt as if he could hear Basil Hallward’s heart

beating, and wondered what was coming.

‘The story is simply this,’ said the painter after some time. ‘Two

months ago I went to a crush at Lady Brandon’s. You know we poor

artists have to show ourselves in society from time to time, just to

come face to face with some one whose mere personality was so

nature, my whole soul, my very art itself. I did not want any

external inɻuence in my life. You know yourself, Harry, how

independent I am by nature. I have always been my own master;

that I was on the verge of a terrible crisis in my life. I had a strange

sorrows. I grew afraid,5 and turned to quit the room. It was not

conscience that made me do so: it was a sort of cowardice. I take no

credit to myself for trying to escape.’

‘Conscience and cowardice are really the same things, Basil.

Conscience is the trade-name of the ɹrm. That is all.’

‘I don’t believe that, Harry, and I don’t believe you do either.

However, whatever was my motive – and it may have been pride,

for I used to be very proud – I certainly struggled to the door. There,

curiously shrill voice?’

‘Yes; she is a peacock in everything but beauty,’ said Lord Henry,

pulling the daisy to bits with his long, nervous ɹngers.

‘I could not get rid of her. She brought me up to Royalties, and

people with Stars and Garters,6 and elderly ladies with gigantic

tiaras and parrot noses. She spoke of me as her dearest friend. I had

only met her once before, but she took it into her head to lionize

me. I believe some picture of mine had made a great success at the

time, at least had been chattered about in the penny newspapers,

which is the nineteenth-century standard of immortality. Suddenly I

found myself face to face with the young man whose personality

had so strangely stirred me. We were quite close, almost touching.

to introduce me to him. Perhaps it was not so reckless, after all. It

was simply inevitable. We would have spoken to each other without

any introduction. I am sure of that. Dorian told me so afterwards.

He, too, felt that we were destined to know each other.’

‘And how did Lady Brandon describe this wonderful young

man?’ asked his companion. ‘I know she goes in for giving a rapid

précis of all her guests. I remember her bringing me up to a truculent

and red-faced old gentleman covered all over with orders and

ribbons, and hissing into my ear, in a tragic whisper which must

have been perfectly audible to everybody in the room, the most

everything about them except what one wants to know.’

listlessly.

‘My dear fellow, she tried to found a salon, and only succeeded

in opening a restaurant. How could I admire her? But tell me, what

did she say about Mr Dorian Gray?’

‘Oh, something like, ‘‘Charming boy – poor dear mother and I

absolutely inseparable. Quite forget what he does – afraid he –

doesn’t do anything – oh, yes, plays the piano – or is it the violin,

dear Mr Gray?’’ Neither of us could help laughing, and we became

friends at once.’

‘Laughter is not at all a bad beginning for a friendship, and it is

far the best ending for one,’ said the young lord, plucking another

daisy.

Hallward shook his head.7 ‘You don’t understand what friendship

is, Harry,’ he murmured – ‘or what enmity is, for that matter. You

like every one; that is to say, you are indiʃerent to every one.’

‘How horribly unjust of you!’ cried Lord Henry, tilting his hat

back, and looking up at the little clouds that, like ravelled skeins of

glossy white silk, were drifting across the hollowed turquoise of the

summer sky. ‘Yes; horribly unjust of you. I make a great diʃerence

between people. I choose my friends for their good looks, my

very vain of me? I think it is rather vain.’

‘I should think it was, Harry. But according to your category I

must be merely an acquaintance.’

‘My dear old Basil, you are much more than an acquaintance.’

‘And much less than a friend. A sort of brother, I suppose?’

‘Oh, brothers! I don’t care for brothers. My elder brother won’t

die, and my younger brothers seem never to do anything else.’

‘Harry!’ exclaimed Hallward, frowning.

‘My dear fellow, I am not quite serious. But I can’t help detesting

my relations. I suppose it comes from the fact that none of us can

stand other people having the same faults as ourselves. I quite

sympathize with the rage of the English democracy against what

they call the vices of the upper orders. The masses feel that

drunkenness, stupidity, and immorality should be their own special

property, and that if any one of us makes an ass of himself he is

poaching on their preserves. When poor Southwark got into the

Divorce Court, their indignation was quite magniɹcent. And yet I

don’t suppose that ten per cent. of the proletariat live correctly.’8

‘I don’t agree with a single word that you have said, and, what is

more, Harry, I feel sure you don’t either.’

who expresses it. Indeed, the probabilities are that the more

insincere the man is, the more purely intellectual will the idea be, as

in that case it will not be coloured by either his wants, his desires,

principles, and I like persons with no principles better than anything

else in the world. Tell me more about Mr Dorian Gray. How often

do you see him?’

‘Every day. I couldn’t be happy if I didn’t see him every day.9 He

is absolutely necessary to me.’

‘How extraordinary! I thought you would never care for anything

but your art.’

‘He is all my art to me now,’ said the painter, gravely. ‘I

sometimes think, Harry, that there are only two eras of any

importance in the world’s history. The ɹrst is the appearance of a

new medium for art, and the second is the appearance of a new

personality for art also. What the invention of oil-painting was to

or that his beauty is such that Art cannot express it. There is nothing

some curious way – I wonder will you understand me? – his

me before. ‘‘A dream of form in days of thought:’’ – who is it who

presence – ah! I wonder can you realize all that that means?

Unconsciously he deɹnes for me the lines of a fresh school, a school

that is to have in it all the passion of the romantic spirit, all the

perfection of the spirit that is Greek. The harmony of soul and body

– how much that is! We in our madness have separated the two, and

have invented a realism that is vulgar, an ideality that is void.

Harry! if you only knew what Dorian Gray is to me! You remember

that landscape of mine, for which Agnew oʃered me such a huge

price, but which I would not part with? It is one of the best things I

have ever done. And why is it so? Because while I was painting it,

the wonder I had always looked for, and always missed.’

‘Basil, this is extraordinary! I must see Dorian Gray.’

Hallward got up from the seat, and walked up and down the

garden. After some time he came back. ‘Harry,’ he said, ‘Dorian

Gray is to me simply a motive in art. You might see nothing in him.

I see everything in him. He is never more present in my work than

when no image of him is there. He is a suggestion, as I have said, of

loveliness and subtleties of certain colours. That is all.’

‘Then why won’t you exhibit his portrait?’ asked Lord Henry.

‘Because, without intending it, I have put into it some expression

of all this curious artistic idolatry,10 of which, of course, I have

never cared to speak to him. He knows nothing about it. He shall

never know anything about it. But the world might guess it; and I

will not bare my soul to their shallow, prying eyes. My heart shall

never be put under their microscope. There is too much of myself in

the thing, Harry – too much of myself!’

‘Poets are not so scrupulous as you are. They know how useful

passion is for publication. Nowadays a broken heart will run to

many editions.’

‘I hate them for it,’ cried Hallward. ‘An artist should create

beautiful things, but should put nothing of his own life into them.

We live in an age when men treat art as if it were meant to be a

world shall never see my portrait of Dorian Gray.’

‘I think you are wrong, Basil, but I won’t argue with you. It is

very fond of you?’

The painter considered for a few moments. ‘He likes me,’ he

know I shall be sorry for having said. As a rule, he is charming to

me, and we sit in the studio and talk of a thousand things. Now and

delight in giving me pain. Then I feel, Harry, that I have given away

my whole soul to some one who treats it as if it were a ɻower to put

in his coat, a bit of decoration to charm his vanity, an ornament for

a summer’s day.’

‘Days in summer, Basil, are apt to linger,’ murmured Lord Henry.

‘Perhaps you will tire sooner than he will. It is a sad thing to think

of, but there is no doubt that Genius lasts longer than Beauty. That

accounts for the fact that we all take such pains to over-educate

ourselves. In the wild struggle for existence, we want to have

something that endures, and so we ɹll our minds with rubbish and

facts, in the silly hope of keeping our place. The thoroughly well-

informed man – that is the modern ideal. And the mind of the

thoroughly well-informed man is a dreadful thing. It is like a bric-à

perfectly cold and indiʃerent. It will be a great pity, for it will alter

that it leaves one so unromantic.’

‘Harry, don’t talk like that. As long as I live, the personality of

Dorian Gray will dominate me. You can’t feel what I feel. You

change too often.’

‘Ah, my dear Basil, that is exactly why I can feel it. Those who

are faithful know only the trivial side of love: it is the faithless who

silver case, and began to smoke a cigarette with a self-conscious and

satisɹed air, as if he had summed up the world in a phrase. There

was a rustle of chirruping sparrows in the green lacquer leaves of

the ivy, and the blue cloud-shadows chased themselves across the

grass like swallows. How pleasant it was in the garden! And how

delightful other people’s emotions were! – much more delightful

there, and the whole conversation would have been about the

escaped all that! As he thought of his aunt, an idea seemed to strike

remembered.’

‘Remembered what, Harry?’

‘Where I heard the name of Dorian Gray.’

‘Where was it?’ asked Hallward, with a slight frown.

‘Don’t look so angry, Basil. It was at my aunt, Lady Agatha’s. She

told me she had discovered a wonderful young man, who was going

to help her in the East End, and that his name was Dorian Gray. I

am bound to state that she never told me he was good-looking.

Women have no appreciation of good looks; at least, good women

have not. She said that he was very earnest, and had a beautiful

nature. I at once pictured to myself a creature with spectacles and

lank hair, horribly freckled, and tramping about on huge feet. I wish

I had known it was your friend.’

‘I am very glad you didn’t, Harry.’

‘Why?’

‘I don’t want you to meet him.’

‘You don’t want me to meet him?’

‘No.’

‘Mr Dorian Gray is in the studio, sir,’ said the butler, coming into

the garden.

‘You must introduce me now,’ cried Lord Henry, laughing.

The painter turned to his servant, who stood blinking in the

sunlight. ‘Ask Mr Gray to wait, Parker: I shall be in in a few

moments.’ The man bowed, and went up the walk.

Then he looked at Lord Henry. ‘Dorian Gray is my dearest

friend,’ he said. ‘He has a simple and a beautiful nature. Your aunt

was quite right in what she said of him. Don’t spoil him. Don’t try to

inɻuence him. Your inɻuence would be bad. The world is wide, and

has many marvellous people in it. Don’t take away from me the one

person who gives to my art whatever charm it possesses:11 my life

as an artist depends on him. Mind, Harry, I trust you.’ He spoke very

slowly, and the words seemed wrung out of him almost against his

will.

‘What nonsense you talk!’ said Lord Henry, smiling, and, taking

Hallward by the arm, he almost led him into the house.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER II

As they entered they saw Dorian Gray. He was seated at the piano,

with his back to them, turning over the pages of a volume of

Schumann’s ‘Forest Scenes’. ‘You must lend me these, Basil,’ he

cried. ‘I want to learn them. They are perfectly charming.’

‘That entirely depends on how you sit to-day, Dorian.’

‘Oh, I am tired of sitting, and I don’t want a life-sized portrait of

myself,’ answered the lad, swinging round on the music-stool, in a

wilful, petulant manner. When he caught sight of Lord Henry, a

faint blush coloured his cheeks for a moment, and he started up. ‘I

beg your pardon, Basil, but I didn’t know you had any one with

you.’

‘This is Lord Henry Wotton, Dorian, an old Oxford friend of

mine. I have just been telling him what a capital sitter you were,

and now you have spoiled everything.’

‘You have not spoiled my pleasure in meeting you, Mr Gray,’

said Lord Henry, stepping forward and extending his hand. ‘My aunt

has often spoken to me about you. You are one of her favourites,

and, I am afraid, one of her victims also.’

‘I am in Lady Agatha’s black books at present,’ answered Dorian,

with a funny look of penitence. ‘I promised to go to a club in

Whitechapel with her last Tuesday,1 and I really forgot all about it.

don’t know what she will say to me. I am far too frightened to call.’

‘Oh, I will make your peace with my aunt. She is quite devoted

there. The audience probably thought it was a duet. When Aunt

people.’

‘That is very horrid to her, and not very nice to me,’ answered

Dorian, laughing.

Lord Henry looked at him. Yes, he was certainly wonderfully

handsome, with his ɹnely-curved scarlet lips, his frank blue eyes, his

crisp gold hair. There was something in his face that made one trust

youth’s passionate purity. One felt that he had kept himself

unspotted from the world. No wonder Basil Hallward worshipped

him.2

‘You are too charming to go in for philanthropy, Mr Gray – far

too charming.’ And Lord Henry ɻung himself down on the divan,

and opened his cigarette-case.

The painter had been busy mixing his colours and getting his

brushes ready. He was looking worried, and when he heard Lord

Henry’s last remark he glanced at him, hesitated for a moment, and

then said, ‘Harry, I want to ɹnish this picture to-day. Would you

think it awfully rude of me if I asked you to go away?’

Gray?’ he asked.

you to tell me why I should not go in for philanthropy.’

‘I don’t know that I shall tell you that, Mr Gray. It is so tedious a

subject that one would have to talk seriously about it. But I certainly

shall not run away, now that you have asked me to stop. You don’t

really mind, Basil, do you? You have often told me that you liked

your sitters to have some one to chat to.’

Hallward bit his lip. ‘If Dorian wishes it, of course you must stay.

Dorian’s whims are laws to everybody, except himself.’

Lord Henry took up his hat and gloves. ‘You are very pressing,

Basil, but I am afraid I must go. I have promised to meet a man at

the Orleans. Good-bye, Mr Gray. Come and see me some afternoon

to me when you are coming. I should be sorry to miss you.’

‘Basil,’ cried Dorian Gray, ‘if Lord Henry Wotton goes I shall go

too. You never open your lips while you are painting, and it is

horribly dull standing on a platform and trying to look pleasant. Ask

him to stay. I insist upon it.’

‘Stay, Harry, to oblige Dorian, and to oblige me,’ said Hallward,

gazing intently at his picture. ‘It is quite true, I never talk when I am

working, and never listen either, and it must be dreadfully tedious

for my unfortunate sitters. I beg you to stay.’

‘But what about my man at the Orleans?’

about that. Sit down again, Harry. And now, Dorian, get up on the

what Lord Henry says. He has a very bad inɻuence over all his

friends, with the single exception of myself.’

Dorian Gray stepped up on the dais, with the air of a young

made a delightful contrast. And he had such a beautiful voice. After

a few moments he said to him, ‘Have you really a very bad

inɻuence, Lord Henry? As bad as Basil says?’

‘There is no such thing as a good inɻuence, Mr Gray. All

inɻuence is immoral – immoral from the scientiɹc point of view.’

‘Why?’

‘Because to inɻuence a person is to give him one’s own soul. He

does not think his natural thoughts, or burn with his natural

passions. His virtues are not real to him. His sins, if there are such

things as sins, are borrowed. He becomes an echo of some one else’s

music, an actor of a part that has not been written for him. The aim

of life is self-development. To realize one’s nature perfectly – that is

what each of us is here for. People are afraid of themselves,

nowadays. They have forgotten the highest of all duties, the duty

that one owes to one’s self. Of course they are charitable. They feed

the hungry, and clothe the beggar. But their own souls starve, and

things that govern us. And yet –’

before.

‘And yet,’ continued Lord Henry, in his low, musical voice, and

with that graceful wave of the hand that was always so

characteristic of him, and that he had even in his Eton days,3 ‘I

believe that if one man were to live out his life fully and completely,

were to give form to every feeling, expression to every thought,

reality to every dream – I believe that the world would gain such a

fresh impulse of joy that we would forget all the maladies of

mediævalism, and return to the Hellenic ideal – to something ɹner,

richer, than the Hellenic ideal, it may be. But the bravest man

amongst us is afraid of himself. The mutilation of the savage has its

tragic survival in the self-denial that mars our lives.4 We are

punished for our refusals. Every impulse that we strive to strangle

broods in the mind, and poisons us. The body sins once, and has

done with its sin, for action is a mode of puriɹcation. Nothing

remains then but the recollection of a pleasure, or the luxury of a

regret. The only way to get rid of a temptation is to yield to it.

Resist it, and your soul grows sick with longing for the things it has

you yourself, with your rose-red youth and your rose-white

boyhood, you have had passions that have made you afraid,

dreams whose mere memory might stain your cheek with shame –’

‘Stop!’ faltered Dorian Gray, ‘stop! you bewilder me. I don’t

Don’t speak. Let me think. Or, rather, let me try not to think.’

For nearly ten minutes he stood there, motionless, with parted

lips, and eyes strangely bright. He was dimly conscious that entirely

have come really from himself. The few words that Basil’s friend

had said to him – words spoken by chance, no doubt, and with

wilful paradox in them – had touched some secret chord that had

never been touched before, but that he felt was now vibrating and

throbbing to curious pulses.

Music had stirred him like that. Music had troubled him many

times. But music was not articulate. It was not a new world, but

rather another chaos, that it created in us. Words! Mere words! How

terrible they were! How clear, and vivid, and cruel! One could not

escape from them. And yet what a subtle magic there was in them!

They seemed to be able to give a plastic form to formless things, and

words! Was there anything so real as words?

Yes; there had been things in his boyhood that he had not

Why had he not known it?

With his subtle smile, Lord Henry watched him. He knew the

interested. He was amazed at the sudden impression that his words

was sixteen, a book which had revealed to him much that he had

not known before, he wondered whether Dorian Gray was passing

through a similar experience. He had merely shot an arrow into the

air. Had it hit the mark? How fascinating the lad was!

Hallward painted away with that marvellous bold touch of his,

that had the true reɹnement and perfect delicacy that in art, at any

rate, comes only from strength. He was unconscious of the silence.5

‘Basil, I am tired of standing,’ cried Dorian Gray, suddenly. ‘I

must go out and sit in the garden. The air is stiɻing here.’

‘My dear fellow, I am so sorry. When I am painting, I can’t think

of anything else. But you never sat better. You were perfectly still.

And I have caught the eʃect I wanted – the half-parted lips, and the

bright look in the eyes. I don’t know what Harry has been saying to

you, but he has certainly made you have the most wonderful

mustn’t believe a word that he says.’

‘He has certainly not been paying me compliments. Perhaps that

is the reason that I don’t believe anything he has told me.’

‘You know you believe it all,’ said Lord Henry, looking at him

with his dreamy, languorous eyes. ‘I will go out to the garden with

you. It is horribly hot in the studio. Basil, let us have something iced

to drink, something with strawberries in it.’

‘Certainly, Harry. Just touch the bell, and when Parker comes I

will tell him what you want. I have got to work up this background,

so I will join you later on. Don’t keep Dorian too long. I have never

been in better form for painting than I am to-day. This is going to be

my masterpiece. It is my masterpiece as it stands.’

Lord Henry went out to the garden, and found Dorian Gray

burying his face in the great cool lilac-blossoms, feverishly drinking

put his hand upon his shoulder. ‘You are quite right to do that,’ he

murmured. ‘Nothing can cure the soul but the senses, just as nothing

can cure the senses but the soul.’

The lad started and drew back. He was bare-headed, and the

leaves had tossed his rebellious curls and tangled all their gilded

threads. There was a look of fear in his eyes, such as people have

when they are suddenly awakened. His ɹnely-chiselled nostrils

quivered, and some hidden nerve shook the scarlet of his lips and

left them trembling.

know.’

Dorian Gray frowned and turned his head away. He could not

His romantic olive-coloured face and worn expression interested

him. There was something in his low, languid voice that was

absolutely fascinating. His cool, white, ɻower-like hands, even, had

a curious charm. They moved, as he spoke, like music, and seemed

there had come some one across his life who seemed to have

disclosed to him life’s mystery. And, yet, what was there to be afraid

of? He was not a schoolboy or a girl. It was absurd to be frightened.

‘Let us go and sit in the shade,’ said Lord Henry. ‘Parker has

brought out the drinks, and if you stay any longer in this glare you

will be quite spoiled, and Basil will never paint you again. You

really must not allow yourself to become sunburnt. It would be

unbecoming.’

‘What can it matter?’ cried Dorian Gray, laughing, as he sat

down on the seat at the end of the garden.

‘It should matter everything to you, Mr Gray.’

‘Why?’

‘Because you have the most marvellous youth, and youth is the

one thing worth having.’

‘I don’t feel that, Lord Henry.’

‘No, you don’t feel it now. Some day, when you are old and

wrinkled and ugly, when thought has seared your forehead with its

lines, and passion branded your lips with its hideous ɹres, you will

feel it, you will feel it terribly. Now, wherever you go, you charm

the world. Will it always be so?… You have a wonderfully beautiful

face, Mr Gray. Don’t frown. You have. And Beauty is a form of

Genius – is higher, indeed, than Genius, as it needs no explanation.

It is of the great facts of the world, like sunlight, or spring-time, or

the reɻection in dark waters of that silver shell we call the moon. It

cannot be questioned. It has its divine right of sovereignty. It makes

you won’t smile.… People say sometimes that Beauty is only

superɹcial. That may be so. But at least it is not so superɹcial as

Thought is. To me, Beauty is the wonder of wonders. It is only

shallow people who do not judge by appearances. The true mystery

of the world is the visible, not the invisible…. Yes, Mr Gray, the

gods have been good to you. But what the gods give they quickly

take away. You have only a few years in which to live really,

perfectly, and fully. When your youth goes, your beauty will go with

it, and then you will suddenly discover that there are no triumphs

false ideals, of our age. Live! Live the wonderful life that is in you!

Let nothing be lost upon you. Be always searching for new

our century wants. You might be its visible symbol. With your

There was so much in you that charmed me that I felt I must tell

you were wasted. For there is such a little time that your youth will

last – such a little time. The common hill-ɻowers wither, but they

blossom again. The laburnum will be as yellow next June as it is

now. In a month there will be purple stars on the clematis, and year

after year the green night of its leaves will hold its purple stars. But

we never get back our youth. The pulse of joy that beats in us at

twenty, becomes sluggish. Our limbs fail, our senses rot. We

degenerate into hideous puppets, haunted by the memory of the

There is absolutely nothing in the world but youth!’

Dorian Gray listened, open-eyed and wondering. The spray of

some new emotion for which we cannot ɹnd expression, or when

some thought that terriɹes us lays sudden siege to the brain and

ɻower seemed to quiver, and then swayed gently to and fro.

Suddenly the painter appeared at the door of the studio, and

made staccato signs for them to come in. They turned to each other,

and smiled.

‘I am waiting,’ he cried. ‘Do come in. The light is quite perfect,

and you can bring your drinks.’

They rose up, and sauntered down the walk together. Two green-

and-white butterɻies ɻuttered past them, and in the pear-tree at the

corner of the garden a thrush began to sing.

‘You are glad you have met me, Mr Gray,’ said Lord Henry,

looking at him.

‘Yes, I am glad now. I wonder shall I always be glad?’

caprice lasts a little longer.’

As they entered the studio, Dorian Gray put his hand upon Lord

platform and resumed his pose.

Lord Henry ɻung himself into a large wicker arm-chair, and

watched him. The sweep and dash of the brush on the canvas made

slanting beams that streamed through the open doorway the dust

danced and was golden. The heavy scent of the roses seemed to

brood over everything.

After about a quarter of an hour Hallward stopped painting,

looked for a long time at Dorian Gray, and then for a long time at

the picture, biting the end of one of his huge brushes, and frowning.

‘It is quite ɹnished,’ he cried at last, and stooping down he wrote his

name in long vermilion letters on the left-hand corner of the canvas.

Lord Henry came over and examined the picture. It was certainly

a wonderful work of art, and a wonderful likeness as well.

‘My dear fellow, I congratulate you most warmly,’ he said. ‘It is

the ɹnest portrait of modern times. Mr Gray, come over and look at

yourself.’

ɹnished?’ he murmured, stepping down from the platform.

‘Quite ɹnished,’ said the painter. ‘And you have sat splendidly

to-day. I am awfully obliged to you.’

‘That is entirely due to me,’ broke in Lord Henry. ‘Isn’t it, Mr

Gray?’

Dorian made no answer, but passed listlessly in front of his

picture and turned towards it. When he saw it he drew back, and his

cheeks ɻushed for a moment with pleasure. A look of joy came into

his eyes, as if he had recognized himself for the ɹrst time. He stood

there motionless and in wonder, dimly conscious that Hallward was

speaking to him, but not catching the meaning of his words. The

sense of his own beauty came on him like a revelation. He had

never felt it before. Basil Hallward’s compliments had seemed to

him to be merely the charming exaggerations of friendship. He had

inɻuenced his nature. Then had come Lord Henry Wotton with his

strange panegyric on youth, his terrible warning of its brevity. That

had stirred him at the time, and now, as he stood gazing at the

shadow of his own loveliness, the full reality of the description

ɻashed across him. Yes, there would be a day when his face would

be wrinkled and wizen, his eyes dim and colourless, the grace of his

ɹgure broken and deformed. The scarlet would pass away from his

lips, and the gold steal from his hair. The life that was to make his

uncouth.

felt as if a hand of ice had been laid upon his heart.

‘Don’t you like it?’ cried Hallward at last, stung a little by the

lad’s silence, not understanding what it meant.

‘Of course he likes it,’ said Lord Henry. ‘Who wouldn’t like it? It

is one of the greatest things in modern art. I will give you anything

you like to ask for it. I must have it.’

‘It is not my property, Harry.’

‘Whose property is it?’

‘Dorian’s, of course,’ answered the painter.

‘He is a very lucky fellow.’

‘How sad it is!’ murmured Dorian Gray, with his eyes still ɹxed

upon his own portrait. ‘How sad it is! I shall grow old, and horrible,

and dreadful. It will never be older than this particular day of

June…. If it were only the other way! If it were I who was to be

always young, and the picture that was to grow old! For that – for

that – I would give everything! Yes, there is nothing in the whole

world I would not give! I would give my soul for that!’

‘You would hardly care for such an arrangement, Basil,’ cried

Lord Henry, laughing. ‘It would be rather hard lines on your work.’

‘I should object very strongly, Harry,’ said Hallward.

Dorian Gray turned and looked at him. ‘I believe you would,

Basil. You like your art better than your friends. I am no more to

you than a green bronze ɹgure. Hardly as much, I dare say.’

The painter stared in amazement. It was so unlike Dorian to

speak like that. What had happened? He seemed quite angry. His

face was ɻushed and his cheeks burning.

‘Yes,’ he continued, ‘I am less to you than your ivory Hermes or

your silver Faun.6 You will like them always. How long will you like

me? Till I have my ɹrst wrinkle, I suppose. I know, now, that when

one losses one’s good looks, whatever they may be, one loses

everything. Your picture has taught me that. Lord Henry Wotton is

perfectly right. Youth is the only thing worth having. When I ɹnd

that I am growing old, I shall kill myself.’

Hallward turned pale, and caught his hand. ‘Dorian! Dorian!’ he

cried, ‘don’t talk like that. I have never had such a friend as you,

and I shall never have such another. You are not jealous of material

things, are you? – you who are ɹner than any of them!’

‘I am jealous of everything whose beauty does not die. I am

jealous of the portrait you have painted of me. Why should it keep

what I must lose? Every moment that passes takes something from

me, and gives something to it. Oh, if it were only the other way! If

the picture could change, and I could be always what I am now!

Why did you paint it? It will mock me some day – mock me

horribly!’7 The hot tears welled into his eyes; he tore his hand away,

cushions, as though he was praying.

‘This is your doing, Harry,’ said the painter, bitterly.

Lord Henry shrugged his shoulders. ‘It is the real Dorian Gray –

that is all.’

‘It is not.’

‘If it is not, what have I to do with it?’

‘You should have gone away when I asked you,’ he muttered.

‘I stayed when you asked me,’ was Lord Henry’s answer.

‘Harry, I can’t quarrel with my two best friends at once, but

between you both you have made me hate the ɹnest piece of work I

have ever done, and I will destroy it. What is it but canvas and

colour? I will not let it come across our three lives and mar them.’

Dorian Gray lifted his golden head from the pillow, and with

pallid face and tear-stained eyes looked at him, as he walked over to

the deal painting-table that was set beneath the high curtained

window. What was he doing there? His ɹngers were straying about

among the litter of tin tubes and dry brushes, seeking for something.

Yes, it was for the long palette-knife, with its thin blade of lithe

steel. He had found it at last. He was going to rip up the canvas.

With a stiɻed sob the lad leaped from the couch, and, rushing

over to Hallward, tore the knife out of his hand, and ɻung it to the

end of the studio. ‘Don’t, Basil, don’t!’ he cried. ‘It would be

murder!’

thought you would.’

‘Appreciate it? I am in love with it, Basil. It is part of myself. I

feel that.’

‘Well, as soon as you are dry, you shall be varnished, and

framed, and sent home. Then you can do what you like with

‘You will have tea, of course, Dorian? And so will you, Harry? Or do

you object to such simple pleasures?’

‘I adore simple pleasures,’ said Lord Henry. ‘They are the last

refuge of the complex. But I don’t like scenes, except on the stage.

What absurd fellows you are, both of you! I wonder who it was

deɹned man as a rational animal. It was the most premature

deɹnition ever given. Man is many things, but he is not rational. I

am glad he is not, after all: though I wish you chaps would not

squabble over the picture. You had much better let me have it, Basil.

This silly boy doesn’t really want it, and I really do.’

‘If you let any one have it but me, Basil, I shall never forgive

you!’ cried Dorian Gray; ‘and I don’t allow people to call me a silly

boy.’

‘You know the picture is yours, Dorian. I gave it to you before it

existed.’

‘And you know you have been a little silly, Mr Gray, and that

you don’t really object to being reminded that you are extremely

young.’

‘I should have objected very strongly this morning, Lord Henry.’

‘Ah! this morning! You have lived since then.’

There came a knock at the door, and the butler entered with a

laden tea-tray and set it down upon a small Japanese table. There

was a rattle of cups and saucers and the hissing of a ɻuted Georgian

urn. Two globe-shaped china dishes were brought in by a page.

Dorian Gray went over and poured out the tea. The two men

sauntered languidly to the table, and examined what was under the

covers.

‘Let us go to the theatre to-night,’ said Lord Henry. ‘There is sure

to be something on, somewhere. I have promised to dine at

White’s,8 but it is only with an old friend, so I can send him a wire

to say that I am ill, or that I am prevented from coming in

consequence of a subsequent engagement. I think that would be a

rather nice excuse; it would have all the surprise of candour.’

‘It is such a bore putting on one’s dress-clothes,’ muttered

Hallward. ‘And, when one has them on, they are so horrid.’

‘Yes,’ answered Lord Henry, dreamily, ‘the costume of the

nineteenth century is detestable. It is so sombre, so depressing. Sin

is the only real colour-element left in modern life.’

‘You really must not say things like that before Dorian, Harry.’

‘Before which Dorian? The one who is pouring out tea for us, or

the one in the picture?’

‘Before either.’

‘I should like to come to the theatre with you, Lord Henry,’ said

the lad.

‘Then you shall come; and you will come too, Basil, won’t you?’

‘I can’t, really. I would sooner not. I have a lot of work to do.’

‘Well, then, you and I will go alone, Mr Gray.’

‘I should like that awfully.’

The painter bit his lip and walked over, cup in hand, to the

picture. ‘I shall stay with the real Dorian,’ he said, sadly.9

‘Is it the real Dorian?’ cried the original of the portrait, strolling

across to him. ‘Am I really like that?’

‘Yes; you are just like that.’

‘How wonderful, Basil!’

‘At least you are like it in appearance. But it will never alter,’

sighed Hallward. ‘That is something.’

‘What a fuss people make about ɹdelity!’ exclaimed Lord Henry.

‘Why, even in love it is purely a question for physiology.10 It has

nothing to do with our own will. Young men want to be faithful,

and are not; old men want to be faithless, and cannot: that is all one

can say.’

‘Don’t go to the theatre to-night, Dorian,’ said Hallward. ‘Stop

and dine with me.’

‘I can’t, Basil.’

‘Why?’

‘Because I have promised Lord Henry Wotton to go with him.’

‘He won’t like you the better for keeping your promises. He

always breaks his own. I beg you not to go.’

Dorian Gray laughed and shook his head.

‘I entreat you.’

The lad hesitated, and looked over at Lord Henry, who was

watching them from the tea-table with an amused smile.

‘I must go, Basil,’ he answered.

‘Very well,’ said Hallward; and he went over and laid down his

cup on the tray. ‘It is rather late, and, as you have to dress, you had

better lose no time. Good-bye, Harry. Good-bye, Dorian. Come and

see me soon. Come to-morrow.’

‘Certainly.’

‘You won’t forget?’

‘No, of course not,’ cried Dorian.

‘And… Harry!’

‘Yes, Basil?’

‘Remember what I asked you, when we were in the garden this

morning.’

‘I have forgotten it.’

‘I trust you.’

‘I wish I could trust myself,’ said Lord Henry, laughing. ‘Come,

Mr Gray, my hansom is outside, and I can drop you at your own

place. Good-bye Basil. It has been a most interesting afternoon.’

As the door closed behind them, the painter ɻung himself down

on a sofa, and a look of pain came into his face.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER III

At half-past twelve next day Lord Henry Wotton strolled from

Curzon Street over to the Albany1 to call on his uncle, Lord Fermor,

a genial if somewhat rough-mannered old bachelor, whom the

outside world called selɹsh because it derived no particular beneɹt

from him, but who was considered generous by Society as he fed the

people who amused him. His father had been our ambassador at

Madrid when Isabella was young, and Prim unthought of,2 but had

retired from the Diplomatic Service in a capricious moment of

annoyance on not being oʃered the Embassy at Paris, a post to

which he considered that he was fully entitled by reason of his

birth, his indolence, the good English of his despatches, and his

inordinate passion for pleasure. The son, who had been his father’s

secretary, had resigned along with his chief, somewhat foolishly as

was thought at the time, and on succeeding some months later to

the title, had set himself to the serious study of the great aristocratic

art of doing absolutely nothing. He had two large town houses, but

preferred to live in chambers as it was less trouble, and took most of

his meals at his club. He paid some attention to the management of

his collieries in the Midland counties, excusing himself for this taint

of industry on the ground that the one advantage of having coal was

that it enabled a gentleman to aʃord the decency of burning wood

on his own hearth. In politics he was a Tory, except when the Tories

were in oɽce, during which period he roundly abused them for

being a pack of Radicals. He was a hero to his valet,3 who bullied

him, and a terror to most of his relations, whom he bullied in turn.

Only England could have produced him, and he always said that the

country was going to the dogs. His principles were out of date, but

there was a good deal to be said for his prejudices.

When Lord Henry entered the room, he found his uncle sitting in

a rough shooting coat, smoking a cheroot and grumbling over The

Times. ‘Well, Harry,’ said the old gentleman, ‘what brings you out so

early? I thought you dandies never got up till two, and were not

visible till ɹve.’

‘Pure family aʃection, I assure you, Uncle George. I want to get

something out of you.’

‘Money, I suppose,’ said Lord Fermor, making a wry face. ‘Well,

sit down and tell me all about it. Young people, nowadays, imagine

that money is everything.’

‘Yes,’ murmured Lord Henry, settling his buttonhole in his coat;

‘and when they grow older they know it. But I don’t want money. It

is only people who pay their bills who want that, Uncle George, and

I never pay mine. Credit is the capital of a younger son, and one

lives charmingly upon it. Besides, I always deal with Dartmoor’s

tradesmen, and consequently they never bother me. What I want is

information: not useful information, of course; useless information.’

‘Well, I can tell you anything that is in an English Blue-book,4

Harry, although those fellows nowadays write a lot of nonsense.

When I was in the Diplomatic, things were much better. But I hear

they let them in now by examination. What can you expect?

whatever he knows is bad for him.’

‘Mr Dorian Gray does not belong to Blue-books, Uncle George,’

said Lord Henry, languidly.

‘Mr Dorian Gray? Who is he?’ asked Lord Fermor, knitting his

bushy white eyebrows.

‘That is what I have come to learn, Uncle George. Or rather, I

know who he is. He is the last Lord Kelso’s grandson. His mother

was a Devereux, Lady Margaret Devereux. I want you to tell me

about his mother. What was she like? Whom did she marry? You

have known nearly everybody in your time, so you might have

known her. I am very much interested in Mr Gray at present. I have

only just met him.’

‘Kelso’s grandson!’ echoed the old gentleman – ‘Kelso’s

grandson!… Of course…. I knew his mother intimately. I believe I

was at her christening. She was an extraordinarily beautiful girl,

Margaret Devereux, and made all the men frantic by running away

with a penniless young fellow, a mere nobody, sir, a subaltern in a

foot regiment, or something of that kind. Certainly. I remember the

whole thing as if it happened yesterday. The poor chap was killed in

a duel at Spa a few months after the marriage. There was an ugly

story about it. They said Kelso got some rascally adventurer, some

Belgian brute, to insult his son-in-law in public, paid him, sir, to do

If he is like his mother he must be a good-looking chap.’

‘He is very good-looking,’ assented Lord Henry.

‘I hope he will fall into proper hands,’ continued the old man.

right thing by him. His mother had money too. All the Selby

property came to her, through her grandfather. Her grandfather

once when I was there. Egad, I was ashamed of him. The Queen

with the cabmen about their fares. They made quite a story of it. I

grandson better than he did the jarvies.’5

‘I don’t know,’ answered Lord Henry. ‘I fancy that the boy will be

well oʃ. He is not of age yet. He has Selby, I know. He told me so.

And… his mother was very beautiful?’

‘Margaret Devereux was one of the loveliest creatures I ever saw,

Harry. What on earth induced her to behave as she did, I never

could understand. She could have married anybody she chose.

Carlington was mad after her. She was romantic, though. All the

girls good enough for him?’

‘It is rather fashionable to marry Americans just now, Uncle

George.’

‘I’ll back English women against the world, Harry,’ said Lord

Fermor, striking the table with his ɹst.

‘The betting is on the Americans.’

‘They don’t last, I am told,’ muttered his uncle.

‘A long engagement exhausts them, but they are capital at a

steeplechase. They take things ɻying. I don’t think Dartmoor has a

chance.’

‘Who are her people?’ grumbled the old gentleman. ‘Has she got

any?’

Lord Henry shook his head. ‘American girls are as clever at

concealing their parents, as English women are at concealing their

past,’ he said, rising to go.

‘They are pork-packers, I suppose?’

‘I hope so, Uncle George, for Dartmoor’s sake. I am told that

pork-packing is the most lucrative profession in America, after

politics.’

‘Is she pretty?’

‘She behaves as if she was beautiful. Most American women do.

It is the secret of their charm.’

‘Why can’t these American women stay in their own country?

They are always telling us that it is the Paradise for women.’

‘It is. That is the reason why, like Eve, they are so excessively

anxious to get out of it,’ said Lord Henry. ‘Good-bye, Uncle George. I

shall be late for lunch, if I stop any longer. Thanks for giving me the

information I wanted. I always like to know everything about my

new friends, and nothing about my old ones.’

‘Where are you lunching, Harry?’

‘At Aunt Agatha’s. I have asked myself and Mr Gray. He is her

latest protégé.’

‘Humph! tell your Aunt Agatha, Harry, not to bother me any

more with her charity appeals. I am sick of them. Why, the good

woman thinks that I have nothing to do but to write cheques for her

silly fads.’

‘All right, Uncle George, I’ll tell her, but it won’t have any eʃect.

Philanthropic people lose all sense of humanity. It is their

distinguishing characteristic.’

The old gentleman growled approvingly, and rang the bell for his

servant. Lord Henry passed up the low arcade into Burlington Street,

and turned his steps in the direction of Berkeley Square.

meanest ɻower might blow…. And how charming he had been at

answered to every touch and thrill of the bow…. There was

something terribly enthralling in the exercise of inɻuence.6 No other

activity was like it. To project one’s soul into some gracious form,

and let it tarry there for a moment; to hear one’s own intellectual

views echoed back to one with all the added music of passion and

youth; to convey one’s temperament into another as though it were

a subtle ɻuid or a strange perfume: there was a real joy in that –

perhaps the most satisfying joy left to us in an age so limited and

vulgar as our own, an age grossly carnal in its pleasures, and grossly

common in its aims…. He was a marvellous type, too, this lad,

whom by so curious a chance he had met in Basil’s studio, or could

mode of looking at life, suggested so strangely by the merely visible

which alone are wonderful things revealed; the mere shapes and

of symbolical value, as though they were themselves patterns of

some other and more perfect form whose shadow they made real:

how strange it all was! He remembered something like it in history.

Was it not Plato, that artist in thought, who had ɹrst analysed it?

Was it not Buonarotti who had carved it in the coloured marbles of

a sonnet-sequence?7 But in our own century it was strange…. Yes;

he would try to be to Dorian Gray what, without knowing it, the lad

was to the painter who had fashioned the wonderful portrait. He

would seek to dominate him – had already, indeed, half done so. He

would make that wonderful spirit his own. There was something

fascinating in this son of Love and Death.

Suddenly he stopped, and glanced up at the houses. He found

that he had passed his aunt’s some distance, and, smiling to himself,

his hat and stick, and passed into the dining-room.

‘Late as usual, Harry,’ cried his aunt, shaking her head at him.

He invented a facile excuse, and having taken the vacant seat

next to her, looked round to see who was there. Dorian bowed to

his cheek. Opposite was the Duchess of Harley, a lady of admirable

who are not Duchesses are described by contemporary historians as

stoutness. Next to her sat, on her right, Sir Thomas Burdon, a

Radical member of Parliament, who followed his leader in public

and well-known rule. The post on her left was occupied by Mr

Erskine of Treadley, an old gentleman of considerable charm and

culture, who had fallen, however, into bad habits of silence, having,

say before he was thirty. His own neighbour was Mrs Vandeleur,

one of his aunt’s oldest friends, a perfect saint amongst women, but

book. Fortunately for him she had on the other side Lord Faudel, a

most intelligent middle-aged mediocrity, as bald as a Ministerial

statement in the House of Commons, with whom she was conversing

into, and from which none of them ever quite escape.

‘We are talking about poor Dartmoor, Lord Henry,’ cried the

he will really marry this fascinating young person?’

‘I believe she has made up her mind to propose to him, Duchess.’

‘How dreadful!’ exclaimed Lady Agatha. ‘Really, some one

should interfere.’

‘I am told, on excellent authority, that her father keeps an

American dry-goods store,’ said Sir Thomas Burdon, looking

supercilious.

‘My uncle has already suggested pork-packing, Sir Thomas.’

‘Dry-goods! What are American dry-goods?’ asked the Duchess,

raising her large hands in wonder, and accentuating the verb.

‘American novels,’ answered Lord Henry, helping himself to

some quail.

The Duchess looked puzzled.

‘Don’t mind him, my dear,’ whispered Lady Agatha. ‘He never

means anything that he says.’

‘When America was discovered,’ said the Radical member, and

he began to give some wearisome facts. Like all people who try to

exhaust a subject, he exhausted his listeners. The Duchess sighed,

and exercised her privilege of interruption. ‘I wish to goodness it

have no chance nowadays. It is most unfair.’

Erskine; ‘I myself would say that it had merely been detected.’

‘Oh! but I have seen specimens of the inhabitants,’ answered the

pretty. And they dress well, too. They get all their dresses in Paris. I

wish I could aʃord to do the same.’

‘They say that when good Americans die they go to Paris,’

chuckled Sir Thomas, who had a large wardrobe of Humour’s cast-

oʃ clothes.

‘Really! And where do bad Americans go to when they die?’

inquired the Duchess.

‘They go to America,’ murmured Lord Henry.

Sir Thomas frowned. ‘I am afraid that your nephew is prejudiced

against that great country,’ he said to Lady Agatha. ‘I have travelled

all over it, in cars provided by the directors, who, in such matters,

are extremely civil. I assure you that it is an education to visit it.’

‘But must we really see Chicago in order to be educated?’ asked

Mr Erskine, plaintively. ‘I don’t feel up to the journey.’

Sir Thomas waved his hand. ‘Mr Erskine of Treadley has the

world on his shelves. We practical men like to see things, not to

read about them. The Americans are an extremely interesting

people. They are absolutely reasonable. I think that is their

Americans.’

‘How dreadful!’ cried Lord Henry. ‘I can stand brute force, but

use. It is hitting below the intellect.’

‘I do not understand you,’ said Sir Thomas, growing rather red.

‘I do, Lord Henry,’ murmured Mr Erskine, with a smile.

‘Paradoxes are all very well in their way…’ rejoined the Baronet.

‘Was that a paradox?’ asked Mr Erskine. ‘I did not think so.

Perhaps it was. Well, the way of paradoxes is the way of truth. To

test Reality we must see it on the tight-rope. When the Verities

become acrobats we can judge them.’

‘Dear me!’ said Lady Agatha, ‘how you men argue! I am sure I

never can make out what you are talking about. Oh! Harry, I am

quite vexed with you. Why do you try to persuade our nice Mr

Dorian Gray to give up the East End? I assure you he would be quite

invaluable. They would love his playing.’

‘I want him to play to me,’ cried Lord Henry, smiling, and he

looked down the table and caught a bright answering glance.

‘But they are so unhappy in Whitechapel,’ continued Lady

Agatha.

‘I can sympathize with everything, except suʃering,’ said Lord

Henry, shrugging his shoulders. ‘I cannot sympathize with that. It is

with the colour, the beauty, the joy of life. The less said about life’s

sores the better.’

Thomas, with a grave shake of the head.

‘Quite so,’ answered the young lord. ‘It is the problem of slavery,

and we try to solve it by amusing the slaves.’

The politician looked at him keenly. ‘What change do you

propose, then?’ he asked.

Lord Henry laughed. ‘I don’t desire to change anything in

bankrupt through an over-expenditure of sympathy, I would suggest

that we should appeal to Science to put us straight. The advantage

of the emotions is that they lead us astray, and the advantage of

Science is that it is not emotional.’

‘But we have such grave responsibilities,’ ventured Mrs

Vandeleur, timidly.

‘Terribly grave,’ echoed Lady Agatha.

Lord Henry looked over at Mr Erskine. ‘Humanity takes itself too

seriously. It is the world’s original sin. If the caveman had known

how to laugh, History would have been diʃerent.’

to look her in the face without a blush.’

‘A blush is very becoming, Duchess,’ remarked Lord Henry.

‘Only when one is young,’ she answered. ‘When an old woman

you would tell me how to become young again.’

He thought for a moment. ‘Can you remember any great error

that you committed in your early days, Duchess?’ he asked, looking

at her across the table.

‘A great many, I fear,’ she cried.

‘Then commit them over again,’ he said, gravely. ‘To get back

one’s youth, one has merely to repeat one’s follies.’

‘A delightful theory!’ she exclaimed. ‘I must put it into practice.’

‘A dangerous theory!’ came from Sir Thomas’s tight lips. Lady

Agatha shook her head, but could not help being amused. Mr

Erskine listened.

‘Yes,’ he continued, ‘that is one of the great secrets of life.

Nowadays most people die of a sort of creeping common sense, and

discover when it is too late that the only things one never regrets

are one’s mistakes.’

A laugh ran round the table.

danced like a Bacchante8 over the hills of life, and mocked the slow

Silenus for being sober. Facts ɻed before her like frightened forest

things. Her white feet trod the huge press at which wise Omar9 sits,

till the seething grape-juice rose round her bare limbs in waves of

purple bubbles, or crawled in red foam over the vat’s black,

dripping, sloping sides. It was an extraordinary improvisation. He

felt that the eyes of Dorian Gray were ɹxed on him, and the

consciousness that amongst his audience there was one whose

temperament he wished to fascinate, seemed to give his wit

keenness, and to lend colour to his imagination. He was brilliant,

fantastic, irresponsible. He charmed his listeners out of themselves,

and they followed his pipe laughing. Dorian Gray never took his

gaze oʃ him, but sat like one under a spell, smiles chasing each

other over his lips, and wonder growing grave in his darkening eyes.

At last, liveried in the costume of the age, Reality entered the

room in the shape of a servant to tell the Duchess that her carriage

was waiting. She wrung her hands in mock despair. ‘How annoying!’

she cried. ‘I must go. I have to call for my husband at the club, to

take him to some absurd meeting at Willis’s Rooms, where he is

dine with us some night. Tuesday? Are you disengaged Tuesday?’

‘For you I would throw over anybody, Duchess,’ said Lord Henry,

with a bow.

‘Ah! that is very nice, and very wrong of you,’ she cried; ‘so mind

and the other ladies.

When Lord Henry had sat down again, Mr Erskine moved round,

and taking a chair close to him, placed his hand upon his arm.

‘You talk books away,’ he said; ‘why don’t you write one?’

‘I am too fond of reading books to care to write them, Mr

Erskine. I should like to write a novel certainly, a novel that would

be as lovely as a Persian carpet and as unreal. But there is no

literary public in England for anything except newspapers, primers,

and encyclopædias. Of all people in the world the English have the

least sense of the beauty of literature.’

‘I fear you are right,’ answered Mr Erskine. ‘I myself used to have

literary ambitions, but I gave them up long ago. And now, my dear

young friend, if you will allow me to call you so, may I ask if you

really meant all that you said to us at lunch?’

bad?’

‘Very bad indeed. In fact I consider you extremely dangerous,

Burgundy I am fortunate enough to possess.’

‘I shall be charmed. A visit to Treadley would be a great

privilege. It has a perfect host, and a perfect library.’

‘You will complete it,’ answered the old gentleman, with a

courteous bow. ‘And now I must bid good-bye to your excellent

aunt. I am due at the Athenæum.10 It is the hour when we sleep

there.’

‘All of you, Mr Erskine?’

‘Forty of us, in forty arm-chairs. We are practising for an English

Academy of Letters.’

Lord Henry laughed, and rose. ‘I am going to the Park,’ he cried.

As he was passing out of the door Dorian Gray touched him on

the arm. ‘Let me come with you,’ he murmured.

‘But I thought you had promised Basil Hallward to go and see

him,’ answered Lord Henry.

talks so wonderfully as you do.’

‘Ah! I have talked quite enough for to-day,’ said Lord Henry,

it with me, if you care to.’

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER IV

One afternoon, a month later, Dorian Gray was reclining in a

luxurious arm-chair, in the little library of Lord Henry’s house in

Mayfair. It was, in its way, a very charming room, with its high

panelled wainscoting of olive-stained oak, its cream-coloured frieze

and ceiling of raised plasterwork, and its brickdust felt carpet

strewn with silk long-fringed Persian rugs. On a tiny satinwood

table stood a statuette by Clodion, and beside it lay a copy of ‘Les

Cent Nouvelles’, bound for Margaret of Valois by Clovis Eve,1 and

powdered with the gilt daisies that Queen had selected for her

device. Some large blue china jars and parrot-tulips were ranged on

the mantelshelf, and through the small leaded panes of the window

streamed the apricot-coloured light of a summer day in London.

Lord Henry had not yet come in. He was always late on

principle, his principle being that punctuality is the thief of time. So

the lad was looking rather sulky, as with listless ɹngers he turned

over the pages of an elaborately-illustrated edition of ‘Manon

Lescaut’ that he had found in one of the bookcases.2 The formal

monotonous ticking of the Louis Quatorze clock annoyed him. Once

or twice he thought of going away.

At last he heard a step outside, and the door opened. ‘How late

you are, Harry!’ he murmured.

‘I am afraid it is not Harry, Mr Gray,’ answered a shrill voice.

pardon. I thought –’

think my husband has got seventeen of them.’

‘Not seventeen, Lady Henry?’

‘Well, eighteen, then. And I saw you with him the other night at

the Opera.’ She laughed nervously as she spoke, and watched him

with her vague forget-me-not eyes. She was a curious woman,

whose dresses always looked as if they had been designed in a rage

and put on in a tempest. She was usually in love with somebody,

and, as her passion was never returned, she had kept all her

illusions. She tried to look picturesque, but only succeeded in being

untidy. Her name was Victoria, and she had a perfect mania for

going to church.

‘That was at ‘‘Lohengrin’’, Lady Henry, I think?’

‘Yes; it was at dear ‘‘Lohengrin’’. I like Wagner’s music better

than anybody’s.3 It is so loud that one can talk the whole time

without other people hearing what one says. That is a great

advantage: don’t you think so, Mr Gray?’

The same nervous staccato laugh broke from her thin lips, and

her ɹngers began to play with a long tortoise-shell paper-knife.

Dorian smiled, and shook his head: ‘I am afraid I don’t think so,

Lady Henry. I never talk during music – at least, during good music.

If one hears bad music, it is one’s duty to drown it in conversation.’

I am afraid of it. It makes me too romantic. I have simply

England become foreigners after a time, don’t they? It is so clever of

pleasant chat about music. We have quite the same ideas. No; I

think our ideas are quite diʃerent. But he has been most pleasant. I

am so glad I’ve seen him.’

‘I am charmed, my love, quite charmed,’ said Lord Henry,

elevating his dark crescent-shaped eyebrows and looking at them

bargain for hours for it. Nowadays people know the price of

everything, and the value of nothing.’4

‘I am afraid I must be going,’ exclaimed Lady Henry, breaking an

awkward silence with her silly sudden laugh. ‘I have promised to

Thornbury’s.’

‘I dare say, my dear,’ said Lord Henry, shutting the door behind

her, as, looking like a bird of paradise that had been out all night in

the rain, she ɻitted out of the room, leaving a faint odour of frangi-

panni. Then he lit a cigarette, and ɻung himself down on the sofa.

‘Never marry a woman with straw-coloured hair, Dorian,’ he

said, after a few puʃs.

‘Why, Harry?’

‘Because they are so sentimental.’

‘But I like sentimental people.’

‘Never marry at all, Dorian. Men marry because they are tired;

women, because they are curious: both are disappointed.’

‘I don’t think I am likely to marry, Harry. I am too much in love.

That is one of your aphorisms. I am putting it into practice, as I do

everything that you say.’

‘Who are you in love with?’ asked Lord Henry, after a pause.

‘With an actress,’ said Dorian Gray, blushing.

Lord Henry shrugged his shoulders. ‘That is a rather

commonplace début.’

‘You would not say so if you saw her, Harry.’

‘Who is she?’

‘Her name is Sibyl Vane.’

‘Never heard of her.’

‘No one has. People will some day, however. She is a genius.’

‘My dear boy, no woman is a genius. Women are a decorative

sex. They never have anything to say, but they say it charmingly.

Women represent the triumph of matter over mind, just as men

represent the triumph of mind over morals.’

‘Harry, how can you?’

‘My dear Dorian, it is quite true. I am analysing women at

present, so I ought to know. The subject is not so abstruse as I

thought it was. I ɹnd that, ultimately, there are only two kinds of

women, the plain and the coloured. The plain women are very

useful. If you want to gain a reputation for respectability, you have

merely to take them down to supper. The other women are very

charming. They commit one mistake, however. They paint in order

to try and look young. Our grandmothers painted in order to try and

talk brilliantly. Rouge and esprit used to go together. That is all over

daughter, she is perfectly satisɹed. As for conversation, there are

only ɹve women in London worth talking to, and two of these can’t

be admitted into decent society. However, tell me about your

genius. How long have you known her?’

‘Ah! Harry, your views terrify me.’

‘Never mind that. How long have you known her?’

‘About three weeks.’

‘And where did you come across her?’

‘I will tell you, Harry; but you mustn’t be unsympathetic about

it. After all, it never would have happened if I had not met you. You

after I met you, something seemed to throb in my veins. As I

every one who passed me, and wonder, with a mad curiosity, what

with terror. There was an exquisite poison in the air. I had a passion

for sensations…. Well, one evening about seven o’clock, I

have something in store for me. I fancied a thousand things. The

mere danger gave me a sense of delight. I remembered what you

had said to me on that wonderful evening when we ɹrst dined

together, about the search for beauty being the real secret of life.5 I

don’t know what I expected, but I went out and wandered eastward,

soon losing my way in a labyrinth of grimy streets6 and black,

grassless squares. About half-past eight I passed by an absurd little

theatre, with great ɻaring gas-jets and gaudy play-bills. A hideous

Jew, in the most amazing waistcoat I ever beheld in my life, was

standing at the entrance, smoking a vile cigar. He had greasy

ringlets, and an enormous diamond blazed in the centre of a soiled

shirt. ‘Have a box, my Lord?’ he said, when he saw me, and he took

of you!’

‘I am not laughing, Dorian; at least I am not laughing at you. But

will always be in love with love. A grande passion is the privilege of

store for you. This is merely the beginning.’

‘Do you think my nature so shallow?’ cried Dorian Gray, angrily.

‘No; I think your nature so deep.’

‘How do you mean?’

‘My dear boy, the people who love only once in their lives are

really the shallow people. What they call their loyalty, and their

ɹdelity, I call either the lethargy of custom or their lack of

imagination. Faithfulness is to the emotional life what consistency is

to the life of the intellect – simply a confession of failure.

Faithfulness! I must analyse it some day. The passion for property is

in it. There are many things that we would throw away if we were

interrupt you. Go on with your story.’

‘Well, I found myself seated in a horrid little private box, with a

vulgar drop-scene staring me in the face. I looked out from behind

the curtain, and surveyed the house. It was a tawdry aʃair, all

and there was a terrible consumption of nuts going on.’

‘It must have been just like the palmy days of the British Drama.’

‘Just like, I should fancy, and very depressing. I began to wonder

what on earth I should do, when I caught sight of the play-bill. What

do you think the play was, Harry?’

‘I should think ‘‘The Idiot Boy, or Dumb but Innocent’’.7 Our

fathers used to like that sort of piece, I believe. The longer I live,

Dorian, the more keenly I feel that whatever was good enough for

our fathers is not good enough for us. In art, as in politics, les

grandpères ont toujours tort.’

‘This play was good enough for us, Harry. It was ‘‘Romeo and

Juliet’’. I must admit that I was rather annoyed at the idea of seeing

Shakespeare done in such a wretched hole of a place. Still, I felt

interested, in a sort of way. At any rate, I determined to wait for the

ɹrst act. There was a dreadful orchestra, presided over by a young

Hebrew who sat at a cracked piano, that nearly drove me away, but

violet wells of passion, lips that were like the petals of a rose. She

could ɹll your eyes with tears. I tell you, Harry, I could hardly see

this girl for the mist of tears that came across me. And her voice – I

never heard such a voice. It was very low at ɹrst, with deep mellow

notes, that seemed to fall singly upon one’s ear. Then it became a

little louder, and sounded like a ɻute or a distant hautbois.8 In the

garden-scene it had all the tremulous ecstasy that one hears just

before dawn when nightingales are singing. There were moments,

later on, when it had the wild passion of violins. You know how a

voice can stir one. Your voice and the voice of Sibyl Vane are two

things that I shall never forget. When I close my eyes, I hear them,

and each of them says something diʃerent. I don’t know which to

follow. Why should I not love her? Harry, I do love her. She is

everything to me in life. Night after night I go to see her play. One

evening she is Rosalind, and the next evening she is Imogen. I have

She has been innocent, and the black hands of jealousy have

crushed her reed-like throat.9 I have seen her in every age and in

every costume. Ordinary women never appeal to one’s imagination.

They are limited to their century. No glamour ever transɹgures

them. One knows their minds as easily as one knows their bonnets.

One can always ɹnd them. There is no mystery in any of them. They

ride in the Park in the morning, and chatter at tea-parties in the

afternoon. They have their stereotyped smile, and their fashionable

manner. They are quite obvious. But an actress! How diʃerent an

actress is! Harry! why didn’t you tell me that the only thing worth

loving is an actress?’

‘Because I have loved so many of them, Dorian.’

‘Oh, yes, horrid people with dyed hair and painted faces.’ ‘Don’t

run down dyed hair and painted faces.10 There is an extraordinary

charm in them, sometimes,’ said Lord Henry. ‘I wish now I had not

told you about Sibyl Vane.’ ‘You could not have helped telling me,

Dorian. All through your life you will tell me everything you do.’

‘Yes, Harry, I believe that is true. I cannot help telling you

things. You have a curious inɻuence over me. If I ever did a crime, I

would come and confess it to you. You would understand me.’

thanks: – what are your actual relations with Sibyl Vane?’11

Dorian Gray leaped to his feet, with ɻushed cheeks and burning

eyes. ‘Harry! Sibyl Vane is sacred!’

‘It is only the sacred things that are worth touching, Dorian,’ said

Lord Henry, with a strange touch of pathos in his voice. ‘But why

should you be annoyed? I suppose she will belong to you some day.

When one is in love, one always begins by deceiving one’s self, and

one always ends by deceiving others. That is what the world calls a

romance. You know her, at any rate, I suppose?’

‘Of course I know her. On the ɹrst night I was at the theatre, the

horrid old Jew came round to the box after the performance was

over, and oʃered to take me behind the scenes and introduce me to

her. I was furious with him, and told him that Juliet had been dead

for hundreds of years, and that her body was lying in a marble tomb

in Verona. I think, from his blank look of amazement, that he was

under the impression that I had taken too much champagne, or

something.’

‘I am not surprised.’

‘Then he asked me if I wrote for any of the newspapers. I told

him I never even read them. He seemed terribly disappointed at

that, and conɹded to me that all the dramatic critics were in a

bought.’

‘I should not wonder if he was quite right there. But, on the

at all expensive.’

‘Well, he seemed to think they were beyond his means,’ laughed

theatre, and I had to go. He wanted me to try some cigars that he

oʃensive brute, though he had an extraordinary passion for

calling him. He seemed to think it a distinction.’

‘It was a distinction, my dear Dorian – a great distinction. Most

people become bankrupt through having invested too heavily in the

prose of life. To have ruined one’s self over poetry is an honour. But

when did you ɹrst speak to Miss Sibyl Vane?’

‘The third night. She had been playing Rosalind. I could not help

me; at least I fancied that she had. The old Jew was persistent. He

seemed determined to take me behind, so I consented. It was

curious my not wanting to know her, wasn’t it?’

‘No; I don’t think so.’

‘My dear Harry, why?’

girl.’

‘Sibyl? Oh, she was so shy, and so gentle. There is something of a

child about her. Her eyes opened wide in exquisite wonder when I

told her what I thought of her performance, and she seemed quite

old Jew stood grinning at the doorway of the dusty greenroom,

making elaborate speeches about us both, while we stood looking at

each other like children. He would insist on calling me ‘My Lord’, so

I had to assure Sibyl that I was not anything of the kind. She said

Prince Charming.’’ ’

‘Upon my word, Dorian, Miss Sibyl knows how to pay

compliments.’

‘You don’t understand her, Harry. She regarded me merely as a

mother, a faded tired woman who played Lady Capulet in a sort of

magenta dressing-wrapper on the ɹrst night, and looks as if she had

seen better days.’

‘I know that look. It depresses me,’ murmured Lord Henry,

examining his rings.

‘The Jew wanted to tell me her history, but I said it did not

interest me.’

about other people’s tragedies.’

came from? From her little head to her little feet, she is absolutely

every night she is more marvellous.’

‘That is the reason, I suppose, that you never dine with me now.

but it is not quite what I expected.’

‘My dear Harry, we either lunch or sup together every day, and I

have been to the Opera with you several times,’ said Dorian,

opening his blue eyes in wonder.

‘You always come dreadfully late.’

‘Well, I can’t help going to see Sibyl play,’ he cried, ‘even if it is

only for a single act. I get hungry for her presence; and when I think

of the wonderful soul that is hidden away in that little ivory body, I

am ɹlled with awe.’

‘You can dine with me to-night, Dorian, can’t you?’

He shook his head. ‘To-night she is Imogen,’ he answered, ‘and

to-morrow night she will be Juliet.’

‘When is she Sibyl Vane?’

‘Never.’

‘I congratulate you.’

stir their dust into consciousness, to wake their ashes into pain. My

terribly excited.

Lord Henry watched him with a subtle sense of pleasure. How

crept his Soul, and Desire had come to meet it on the way.

‘And what do you propose to do?’ said Lord Henry, at last.

‘I want you and Basil to come with me some night and see her

act. I have not the slightest fear of the result. You are certain to

acknowledge her genius. Then we must get her out of the Jew’s

hands. She is bound to him for three years – at least for two years

and eight months – from the present time. I shall have to pay him

something, of course. When all that is settled, I shall take a West

End theatre and bring her out properly. She will make the world as

mad as she has made me.’

‘That would be impossible, my dear boy?’

it is personalities, not principles, that move the age.’

‘Well, what night shall we go?’

‘Let me see. To-day is Tuesday. Let us ɹx to-morrow. She plays

Juliet to-morrow.’

‘All right. The Bristol12 at eight o’clock; and I will get Basil.’

‘Not eight, Harry, please. Half-past six. We must be there before

the curtain rises. You must see her in the ɹrst act, where she meets

Romeo.’

‘Half-past six! What an hour! It will be like having a meat-tea, or

reading an English novel. It must be seven. No gentleman dines

before seven. Shall you see Basil between this and then? Or shall I

write to him?’

‘Dear Basil! I have not laid eyes on him for a week. It is rather

horrid of me, as he has sent me my portrait in the most wonderful

frame, specially designed by himself, and, though I am a little

jealous of the picture for being a whole month younger than I am, I

must admit that I delight in it. Perhaps you had better write to him.

I don’t want to see him alone. He says things that annoy me. He

gives me good advice.’

Lord Henry smiled. ‘People are very fond of giving away what

they need most themselves.13 It is what I call the depth of

generosity.’

that.’

‘Basil, my dear boy, puts everything that is charming in him into

his work. The consequence is that he has nothing left for life but his

prejudices, his principles, and his common sense. The only artists I

perfectly uninteresting in what they are. A great poet, a really great

poet, is the most unpoetical of all creatures. But inferior poets are

absolutely fascinating. The worse their rhymes are, the more

second-rate sonnets makes a man quite irresistible. He lives the

dare not realize.’

‘I wonder is that really so, Harry?’ said Dorian Gray, putting

some perfume on his handkerchief out of a large gold-topped bottle

that stood on the table. ‘It must be, if you say it. And now I am oʃ.

Imogen is waiting for me. Don’t forget about to-morrow. Good-bye.’

As he left the room, Lord Henry’s heavy eyelids drooped, and he

began to think. Certainly few people had ever interested him so

much as Dorian Gray, and yet the lad’s mad adoration of some one

else caused him not the slightest pang of annoyance or jealousy. He

was pleased by it. It made him a more interesting study. He had

been always enthralled by the methods of natural science,14 but the

strange that one had to pass through them if one sought to

understand their nature. And, yet, what a great reward one

the curious hard logic of passion, and the emotional coloured life of

discord – there was a delight in that! What matter what the cost

was? One could never pay too high a price for any sensation.

He was conscious – and the thought brought a gleam of pleasure

into his brown agate eyes – that it was through certain words of his,

had turned to this white girl and bowed in worship before her. To a

large extent the lad was his own creation.He had made him

premature. That was something. Ordinary people waited till life

disclosed to them its secrets, but to the few, to the elect, the

mysteries of life were revealed before the veil was drawn away.

sculpture, or painting.

Yes, the lad was premature. He was gathering his harvest while

wonder at. It was no matter how it all ended, or was destined to

stir one’s sense of beauty, and whose wounds are like red roses.

Soul and body, body and soul – how mysterious they were!

spirituality. The senses could reɹne, and the intellect could degrade.

Who could say where the ɻeshly impulse ceased, or the psychical

impulse began? How shallow were the arbitrary deɹnitions of

claims of the various schools! Was the soul a shadow seated in the

house of sin? Or was the body really in the soul, as Giordano Bruno

the union of spirit with matter was a mystery also.

of an active cause as conscience itself. All that it really

demonstrated was that our future would be the same as our past,

many times, and with joy.

It was clear to him that the experimental method was the only

and seemed to promise rich and fruitful results. His sudden mad

love for Sibyl Vane was a psychological phenomenon of no small

curiosity and the desire for new experiences; yet it was not a simple

but rather a very complex passion. What there was in it of the

purely sensuous instinct of boyhood had been transformed by the

workings of the imagination, changed into something that seemed to

the lad himself to be remote from sense, and was for that very

reason all the more dangerous. It was the passions about whose

origin we deceived ourselves that tyrannized most strongly over us.

Our weakest motives were those of whose nature we were

conscious. It often happened that when we thought we were

experimenting on others we were really experimenting on ourselves.

While Lord Henry sat dreaming on these things, a knock came to

ɹery-coloured life, and wondered how it was all going to end.

When he arrived home, about half-past twelve o’clock, he saw a

telegram lying on the hall table. He opened it, and found it was

from Dorian Gray. It was to tell him that he was engaged to be

married to Sibyl Vane.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER V

‘Mother, mother, I am so happy!’ whispered the girl, burying her

face in the lap of the faded, tired-looking woman who, with back

turned to the shrill intrusive light, was sitting in the one arm-chair

that their dingy sitting-room contained. ‘I am so happy!’ she

repeated, ‘and you must be happy too!’

Mrs Vane winced, and put her thin bismuth-whitened1 hands on

her daughter’s head. ‘Happy!’ she echoed, ‘I am only happy, Sibyl,

when I see you act. You must not think of anything but your acting.

Mr Isaacs has been very good to us, and we owe him money.’

The girl looked up and pouted. ‘Money, mother?’ she cried,

‘what does money matter? Love is more than money.’

‘Mr Isaacs has advanced us ɹfty pounds to pay oʃ our debts, and

to get a proper outɹt for James. You must not forget that, Sibyl.

Fifty pounds is a very large sum. Mr Isaacs has been most

considerate.’

‘He is not a gentleman, mother, and I hate the way he talks to

me,’ said the girl, rising to her feet, and going over to the window.

‘I don’t know how we could manage without him,’ answered the

elder woman, querulously.

Sibyl Vane tossed her head and laughed. ‘We don’t want him any

more, mother. Prince Charming rules life for us now.’ Then she

paused. A rose shook in her blood, and shadowed her cheeks. Quick

dress. ‘I love him,’ she said simply.

‘Foolish child! foolish child!’ was the parrot-phrase ɻung in

answer. The waving of crooked, false-jewelled ɹngers gave

grotesqueness to the words.

The girl laughed again. The joy of a caged bird was in her voice.

Her eyes caught the melody, and echoed it in radiance: then closed

mist of a dream had passed across them.

Thin-lipped wisdom spoke at her from the worn chair, hinted at

prudence, quoted from that book of cowardice whose author apes

the name of common sense. She did not listen. She was free in her

had called on Memory to remake him. She had sent her soul to

upon her mouth. Her eyelids were warm with his breath.

Then Wisdom altered its method and spoke of espial and

discovery. This young man might be rich. If so, marriage should be

thought of. Against the shell of her ear broke the waves of worldly

cunning. The arrows of craft shot by her. She saw the thin lips

moving, and smiled.

Suddenly she felt the need to speak. The wordy silence troubled

her. ‘Mother, mother,’ she cried, ‘why does he love me so much? I

know why I love him. I love him because he is like what Love

you love my father as I love Prince Charming?’

The elder woman grew pale beneath the coarse powder that

be happy for ever!’

‘My child, you are far too young to think of falling in love.

Besides, what do you know of this young man? You don’t even

of, I must say that you should have shown more consideration.

However, as I said before, if he is rich…’

‘Ah! mother, mother, let me be happy!’

Mrs Vane glanced at her, and with one of those false theatrical

gestures that so often become a mode of second nature to a stage-

and a young lad with rough brown hair came into the room. He was

thick-set of ɹgure, and his hands and feet were large, and somewhat

clumsy in movement. He was not so ɹnely bred as his sister. One

would hardly have guessed the close relationship that existed

She felt sure that the tableau2 was interesting.

‘You might keep some of your kisses for me, Sibyl, I think,’ said

the lad, with a good-natured grumble.

‘Ah! but you don’t like being kissed, Jim,’ she cried. ‘You are a

dreadful old bear.’ And she ran across the room and hugged him.

James Vane looked into his sister’s face with tenderness. ‘I want

you to come out with me for a walk, Sibyl. I don’t suppose I shall

ever see this horrid London again. I am sure I don’t want to.’

‘My son, don’t say such dreadful things,’ murmured Mrs Vane,

taking up a tawdry theatrical dress, with a sigh, and beginning to

patch it. She felt a little disappointed that he had not joined the

group. It would have increased the theatrical picturesqueness of the

situation.

‘Why not, mother? I mean it.’

‘You pain me, my son. I trust you will return from Australia in a

position of aʀuence. I believe there is no society of any kind in the

Colonies, nothing that I would call society; so when you have made

your fortune you must come back and assert yourself in London.’

‘Society!’ muttered the lad. ‘I don’t want to know anything about

that. I should like to make some money to take you and Sibyl oʃ the

stage. I hate it.’

afternoon. Where shall we go? Let us go to the Park.’

‘I am too shabby,’ he answered, frowning. ‘Only swell people go

to the Park.’

‘Nonsense, Jim,’ she whispered, stroking the sleeve of his coat.

He hesitated for a moment. ‘Very well,’ he said at last, ‘but don’t

be too long dressing.’ She danced out of the door. One could hear

her singing as she ran upstairs. Her little feet pattered overhead.

He walked up and down the room two or three times. Then he

turned to the still ɹgure in the chair. ‘Mother, are my things ready?’

he asked.

‘Quite ready, James,’ she answered, keeping her eyes on her

work. For some months past she had felt ill at ease when she was

alone with this rough, stern son of hers. Her shallow secret nature

was troubled when their eyes met. She used to wonder if he

suspected anything. The silence, for he made no other observation,

became intolerable to her. She began to complain. Women defend

themselves by attacking, just as they attack by sudden and strange

surrenders. ‘I hope you will be contented, James, with your sea-

faring life,’ she said. ‘You must remember that it is your own choice.

You might have entered a solicitor’s oɽce. Solicitors are a very

families.’

right. I have chosen my own life. All I say is, watch over Sibyl. Don’t

let her come to any harm. Mother, you must watch over her.’

‘James, you really talk very strangely. Of course I watch over

Sibyl.’

‘I hear a gentleman comes every night to the theatre, and goes

behind to talk to her. Is that right? What about that?’

‘You are speaking about things you don’t understand, James. In

the profession we are accustomed to receive a great deal of most

gratifying attention. I myself used to receive many bouquets at one

time. That was when acting was really understood. As for Sibyl, I do

not know at present whether her attachment is serious or not. But

there is no doubt that the young man in question is a perfect

gentleman. He is always most polite to me. Besides, he has the

appearance of being rich, and the ɻowers he sends are lovely.’

‘You don’t know his name, though,’ said the lad, harshly.

‘No,’ answered his mother, with a placid expression in her face.

‘He has not yet revealed his real name. I think it is quite romantic of

him. He is probably a member of the aristocracy.’

James Vane bit his lip. ‘Watch over Sibyl, mother,’ he cried,

‘watch over her.’

is one of the aristocracy. He has all the appearance of it, I must say.

everybody notices them.’

The lad muttered something to himself, and drummed on the

say something, when the door opened, and Sibyl ran in.

‘How serious you both are!’ she cried. ‘What is the matter?’

‘Nothing,’ he answered. ‘I suppose one must be serious

sometimes. Good-bye, mother; I will have my dinner at ɹve o’clock.

Everything is packed, except my shirts, so you need not trouble.’

‘Good-bye, my son,’ she answered, with a bow of strained

stateliness.

She was extremely annoyed at the tone he had adopted with her,

and there was something in his look that had made her feel afraid.

‘Kiss me, mother,’ said the girl. Her ɻower-like lips touched the

withered cheek, and warmed its frost.

‘My child! my child!’ cried Mrs Vane, looking up to the ceiling in

search of an imaginary gallery.

‘Come, Sibyl,’ said her brother, impatiently. He hated his

mother’s aʃectations.

strolled down the dreary Euston Road.3 The passers-by glanced in

wonder at the sullen, heavy youth, who, in coarse, ill-ɹtting clothes,

was in the company of such a graceful, reɹned-looking girl. He was

like a common gardener walking with a rose.

Jim frowned from time to time when he caught the inquisitive

glance of some stranger. He had that dislike of being stared at which

comes on geniuses late in life, and never leaves the commonplace.

Sibyl, however, was quite unconscious of the eʃect she was

producing. Her love was trembling in laughter on her lips. She was

thinking of Prince Charming, and, that she might think of him all

the more, she did not talk of him, but prattled on about the ship in

which Jim was going to sail, about the gold he was certain to ɹnd,

about the wonderful heiress whose life he was to save from the

wicked, red-shirted bushrangers. For he was not to remain a sailor,

or a super-cargo, or whatever he was going to be. Oh, no! A sailor’s

existence was dreadful. Fancy being cooped up in a horrid ship,

with the hoarse, hump-backed waves trying to get in, and a black

wind blowing the masts down, and tearing the sails into long

screaming ribands! He was to leave the vessel at Melbourne, bid a

polite good-bye to the captain, and go oʃ at once to the gold-ɹelds.

Before a week was over he was to come across a large nugget of

pure gold, the largest nugget that had ever been discovered, and

bring it down to the coast in a waggon guarded by six mounted

defeated with immense slaughter. Or, no. He was not to go to the

gold-ɹelds at all. They were horrid places, where men got

was very good, and would watch over him. She would pray for him

too, and in a few years he would come back quite rich and happy.

The lad listened sulkily to her, and made no answer. He was

heart-sick at leaving home.

Yet it was not this alone that made him gloomy and morose.

Inexperienced though he was, he had still a strong sense of the

danger of Sibyl’s position. This young dandy who was making love

to her could mean her no good. He was a gentleman, and he hated

him for that, hated him through some curious race-instinct for

which he could not account,4 and which for that reason was all the

more dominant within him. He was conscious also of the

shallowness and vanity of his mother’s nature, and in that saw

inɹnite peril for Sibyl and Sibyl’s happiness. Children begin by

they forgive them.

His mother! He had something on his mind to ask of her,

together into a wedge-like furrow, and with a twitch of pain he bit

his under-lip.

‘You are not listening to a word I am saying, Jim,’ cried Sibyl,

something.’

‘What do you want me to say?’

‘Oh! that you will be a good boy, and not forget us,’ she

answered, smiling at him.

He shrugged his shoulders. ‘You are more likely to forget me,

than I am to forget you, Sibyl.’

She ɻushed. ‘What do you mean, Jim?’ she asked.

‘You have a new friend, I hear. Who is he? Why have you not

told me about him? He means you no good.’

‘Stop, Jim!’ she exclaimed. ‘You must not say anything against

him. I love him.’

he? I have a right to know.’

silly boy! you should never forget it. If you only saw him, you would

could come to the theatre to-night. He is going to be there, and I am

to play Juliet. Oh! how I shall play it! Fancy, Jim, to be in love and

play Juliet! To have him sitting there! To play for his delight! I am

in love is to surpass one’s self. Poor dreadful Mr Isaacs will be

shouting ‘‘genius’’ to his loafers at the bar. He has preached me as a

dogma; to-night he will announce me as a revelation. I feel it. And it

is all his, his only, Prince Charming, my wonderful lover, my god of

graces. But I am poor beside him. Poor? What does that matter?

When poverty creeps in at the door, love ɻies in through the

window. Our proverbs want rewriting. They were made in winter,

and it is summer now; springtime for me, I think, a very dance of

blossoms in blue skies.’

‘He is a gentleman,’ said the lad, sullenly.

‘A Prince!’ she cried, musically. ‘What more do you want?’

‘He wants to enslave you.’

‘I shudder at the thought of being free.’

‘I want you to beware of him.’

‘To see him is to worship him, to know him is to trust him.’

‘Sibyl, you are mad about him.’

She laughed, and took his arm. ‘You dear old Jim, you talk as if

you were a hundred. Some day you will be in love yourself. Then

you will know what it is. Don’t look so sulky. Surely you should be

glad to think that, though you are going away, you leave me

going to a new world, and I have found one. Here are two chairs; let

us sit down and see the smart people go by.’

They took their seats amidst a crowd of watchers. The tulip-beds

across the road ɻamed like throbbing rings of ɹre. A white dust,

tremulous cloud of orris-root it seemed, hung in the panting air. The

brightly-coloured parasols danced and dipped like monstrous

butterɻies.

She made her brother talk of himself, his hopes, his prospects.

He spoke slowly and with eʃort. They passed words to each other as

players at a game pass counters. Sibyl felt oppressed. She could not

communicate her joy. A faint smile curving that sullen mouth was

all the echo she could win. After some time she became silent.

Suddenly she caught a glimpse of golden hair and laughing lips, and

in an open carriage with two ladies Dorian Gray drove past.

She started to her feet. ‘There he is!’ she cried.

‘Who?’ said Jim Vane.

‘Prince Charming,’ she answered, looking after the victoria.

the Park.

‘He is gone,’ murmured Sibyl, sadly. ‘I wish you had seen him.’

‘I wish I had, for as sure as there is a God in heaven, if he ever

does you any wrong, I shall kill him.’

She looked at him in horror. He repeated his words. They cut the

air like a dagger. The people round began to gape. A lady standing

close to her tittered.

‘Come away, Jim; come away,’ she whispered. He followed her

had said.

When they reached the Achilles Statue5 she turned round. There

was pity in her eyes that became laughter on her lips. She shook her

head at him. ‘You are foolish, Jim, utterly foolish; a bad-tempered

boy, that is all. How can you say such horrible things? You don’t

know what you are talking about. You are simply jealous and

unkind. Ah! I wish you would fall in love. Love makes people good,

and what you said was wicked.’

‘I am sixteen,’ he answered, ‘and I know what I am about.

Mother is no help to you. She doesn’t understand how to look after

you. I wish now that I was not going to Australia at all. I have a

hadn’t been signed.’

any one I love, would you?’

‘Not as long as you love him, I suppose,’ was the sullen answer. ‘I

shall love him for ever!’ she cried.

‘And he?’

‘For ever, too!’

‘He had better.’

She shrank from him. Then she laughed and put her hand on his

arm. He was merely a boy.

At the Marble Arch they hailed an omnibus, which left them

close to their shabby home in the Euston Road. It was after ɹve

o’clock, and Sibyl had to lie down for a couple of hours before

acting. Jim insisted that she should do so. He said that he would

sooner part with her when their mother was not present. She would

be sure to make a scene, and he detested scenes of every kind.

In Sybil’s own room they parted. There was jealousy in the lad’s

heart, and a ɹerce, murderous hatred of the stranger who, as it

seemed to him, had come between them. Yet, when her arms were

ɻung round his neck, and her ɹngers strayed through his hair, he

eyes as he went downstairs.

His mother was waiting for him below. She grumbled at his

minute that was left to him.

After some time, he thrust away his plate, and put his head in his

hands. He felt that he had a right to know. It should have been told

to him before, if it was as he suspected. Leaden with fear, his

mercy. It enraged him.

‘Mother, I have something to ask you,’ he said. Her eyes

wandered vaguely about the room. She made no answer. ‘Tell me

the truth. I have a right to know. Were you married to my father?’

She heaved a deep sigh. It was a sigh of relief. The terrible

had dreaded, had come at last, and yet she felt no terror. Indeed in

some measure it was a disappointment to her. The vulgar directness

rehearsal.

‘No,’ she answered, wondering at the harsh simplicity of life.

‘My father was a scoundrel then!’ cried the lad, clenching his

ɹsts.

She shook her head. ‘I knew he was not free. We loved each

other very much. If he had lived, he would have made provision for

us. Don’t speak against him, my son. He was your father, and a

gentleman. Indeed he was highly connected.’

An oath broke from his lips. ‘I don’t care for myself,’ he

exclaimed, ‘but don’t let Sibyl…. It is a gentleman, isn’t it, who is in

love with her, or says he is? Highly connected, too, I suppose.’

For a moment a hideous sense of humiliation came over the

woman. Her head drooped. She wiped her eyes with shaking hands.

‘Sibyl has a mother,’ she murmured; ‘I had none.’

The lad was touched. He went towards her, and stooping down

father,’ he said, ‘but I could not help it. I must go now. Good-bye.

Don’t forget that you will have only one child now to look after, and

believe me that if this man wrongs my sister, I will ɹnd out who he

is, track him down, and kill him like a dog. I swear it.’

The exaggerated folly of the threat, the passionate gesture that

accompanied it, the mad melodramatic words, made life seem more

vivid to her. She was familiar with the atmosphere. She breathed

more freely, and for the ɹrst time for many months she really

Of the threat she said nothing. It was vividly and dramatically

expressed. She felt that they would all laugh at it some day.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER VI

‘I suppose you have heard the news, Basil?’ said Lord Henry that

evening, as Hallward was shown into a little private room at the

Bristol where dinner had been laid for three.

‘No, Harry,’ answered the artist, giving his hat and coat to the

bowing waiter. ‘What is it? Nothing about politics, I hope? They

don’t interest me. There is hardly a single person in the House of

Commons worth painting; though many of them would be the better

for a little whitewashing.’

‘Dorian Gray is engaged to be married,’ said Lord Henry,

watching him as he spoke.

Hallward started, and then frowned.1 ‘Dorian engaged to be

married!’ he cried. ‘Impossible!’

‘It is perfectly true.’

‘To whom?’

‘To some little actress or other.’

‘I can’t believe it. Dorian is far too sensible.’

‘Dorian is far too wise not to do foolish things now and then, my

dear Basil.’

‘Marriage is hardly a thing that one can do now and then, Harry.’

‘Except in America,’ rejoined Lord Henry, languidly. ‘But I didn’t

say he was married. I said he was engaged to be married. There is a

great diʃerence. I have a distinct remembrance of being married,

think that I never was engaged.’

be absurd for him to marry so much beneath him.’

‘If you want to make him marry this girl tell him that, Basil. He

is sure to do it, then. Whenever a man does a thoroughly stupid

thing, it is always from the noblest motives.’

‘I hope the girl is good, Harry. I don’t want to see Dorian tied to

some vile creature, who might degrade his nature and ruin his

intellect.’

‘Oh, she is better than good – she is beautiful,’ murmured Lord

Henry, sipping a glass of vermouth and orange-bitters. ‘Dorian says

she is beautiful; and he is not often wrong about things of that kind.

Your portrait of him has quickened his appreciation of the personal

appearance of other people. It has had that excellent eʃect, amongst

appointment.’

‘Are you serious?’

‘Quite serious, Basil. I should be miserable if I thought I should

ever be more serious than I am at the present moment.’

‘But do you approve of it, Harry?’ asked the painter, walking up

and down the room, and biting his lip. ‘You can’t approve of it,

possibly. It is some silly infatuation.’

personality fascinates me, whatever mode of expression that

her. Why not? If he wedded Messalina2 he would be none the less

interesting. You know I am not a champion of marriage. The real

drawback to marriage is that it makes one unselɹsh. And unselɹsh

people are colourless. They lack individuality. Still, there are certain

egotism, and add to it many other egos. They are forced to have

more than one life. They become more highly organized, and to be

highly organized is, I should fancy, the object of man’s existence.3

Besides, every experience is of value, and, whatever one may say

against marriage, it is certainly an experience. I hope that Dorian

Gray will make this girl his wife, passionately adore her for six

months, and then suddenly become fascinated by some one else. He

would be a wonderful study.’

‘You don’t mean a single word of all that, Harry; you know you

don’t. If Dorian Gray’s life were spoiled, no one would be sorrier

than yourself. You are much better than you pretend to be.’

Lord Henry laughed. ‘The reason we all like to think so well of

others is that we are all afraid for ourselves. The basis of optimism

beneɹt to us. We praise the banker that we may overdraw our

between men and women. I will certainly encourage them. They

will tell you more than I can.’

‘My dear Harry, my dear Basil, you must both congratulate me!’

said the lad, throwing oʃ his evening cape with its satin-lined

things are. And yet it seems to me to be the one thing I have been

looking for all my life.’ He was ɻushed with excitement and

pleasure, and looked extraordinarily handsome.

‘I hope you will always be very happy, Dorian,’ said Hallward,

engagement. You let Harry know.’

‘And I don’t forgive you for being late for dinner,’ broke in Lord

Henry, putting his hand on the lad’s shoulder, and smiling as he

and then you will tell us how it all came about.’

‘There is really not much to tell,’ cried Dorian, as they took their

seats at the small round table. ‘What happened was simply this.

at that little Italian restaurant in Rupert Street, you introduced me

her boy’s clothes she was perfectly wonderful. She wore a moss-

coloured velvet jerkin with cinnamon sleeves, slim brown cross-

gartered hose, a dainty little green cap with a hawk’s feather caught

in a jewel, and a hooded cloak lined with dull red. She had never

seemed to me more exquisite. She had all the delicate grace of that

Tanagra ɹgurine that you have in your studio, Basil. Her hair

artist. I sat in the dingy box absolutely enthralled. I forgot that I was

in a forest that no man had ever seen. After the performance was

suddenly there came into her eyes a look that I had never seen there

describe to you what I felt at that moment. It seemed to me that all

my life had been narrowed to one perfect point of rose-coloured joy.

She trembled all over, and shook like a white narcissus. Then she

what I like. I have been right, Basil, haven’t I, to take my love out of

mouth.’

‘Yes, Dorian, I suppose you were right,’ said Hallward, slowly.

‘Have you seen her to-day?’ asked Lord Henry.

Dorian Gray shook his head. ‘I left her in the forest of Arden, I

shall ɹnd her in an orchard in Verona.’

Lord Henry sipped his champagne in a meditative manner. ‘At

what particular point did you mention the word marriage, Dorian?

And what did she say in answer? Perhaps you forgot all about it.’

‘My dear Harry, I did not treat it as a business transaction, and I

did not make any formal proposal. I told her that I loved her, and

she said she was not worthy to be my wife. Not worthy! Why, the

whole world is nothing to me compared with her.’

‘Women are wonderfully practical,’ murmured Lord Henry, –

‘much more practical than we are. In situations of that kind we

often forget to say anything about marriage, and they always

remind us.’

misery upon any one. His nature is too ɹne for that.’

Lord Henry looked across the table. ‘Dorian is never annoyed

possible, for the only reason, indeed, that excuses one for asking any

are not modern.’

Dorian Gray laughed, and tossed his head. ‘You are quite

could wrong her would be a beast, a beast without a heart. I cannot

understand how any one can wish to shame the thing he loves. I

love Sibyl Vane. I want to place her on a pedestal of gold, and to see

the world worship the woman who is mine. What is marriage? An

irrevocable vow. You mock at it for that. Ah! don’t mock. It is an

irrevocable vow that I want to take. Her trust makes me faithful, her

belief makes me good. When I am with her, I regret all that you

have taught me. I become diʃerent from what you have known me

theories.’

salad.

‘Oh, your theories about life, your theories about love, your

theories about pleasure. All your theories, in fact, Harry.’

‘Pleasure is the only thing worth having a theory about,’ he

claim my theory as my own. It belongs to Nature, not to me.

Pleasure is Nature’s test, her sign of approval. When we are happy

we are always good, but when we are good we are not always

happy.’

‘Ah! but what do you mean by good?’ cried Basil Hallward.

‘Yes,’ echoed Dorian, leaning back in his chair, and looking at

Lord Henry over the heavy clusters of purple-lipped irises that stood

in the centre of the table, ‘what do you mean by good, Harry?’

‘To be good is to be in harmony with one’s self,’ he replied,

touching the thin stem of his glass with his pale, ɹne-pointed

ɹngers. ‘Discord is to be forced to be in harmony with others. One’s

own life – that is the important thing. As for the lives of one’s

neighbours, if one wishes to be a prig or a Puritan, one can ɻaunt

one’s moral views about them, but they are not one’s concern.

Besides, Individualism has really the higher aim. Modern morality

consists in accepting the standard of one’s age. I consider that for

any man of culture to accept the standard of his age is a form of the

grossest immorality.’

terrible price for doing so?’ suggested the painter.

‘Yes, we are overcharged for everything nowadays. I should

nothing but self-denial. Beautiful sins, like beautiful things, are the

privilege of the rich.’

‘One has to pay in other ways but money.’

‘What sort of ways, Basil?’

‘Oh! I should fancy in remorse, in suʃering, in… well, in the

consciousness of degradation.’

Lord Henry shrugged his shoulders. ‘My dear fellow, mediæval

art is charming, but mediæval emotions are out of date. One can use

them in ɹction, of course. But then the only things that one can use

in ɹction are the things that one has ceased to use in fact. Believe

me, no civilized man ever regrets a pleasure, and no uncivilized

man ever knows what a pleasure is.’

‘I know what pleasure is,’ cried Dorian Gray. ‘It is to adore some

one.’

‘That is certainly better than being adored,’ he answered, toying

with some fruits. ‘Being adored is a nuisance. Women treat us just as

Humanity treats its gods. They worship us, and are always bothering

us to do something for them.’

‘I should have said that whatever they ask for they had ɹrst

given to us,’ murmured the lad, gravely. ‘They create Love in our

natures. They have a right to demand it back.’

‘That is quite true, Dorian,’ cried Hallward.

‘Nothing is ever quite true,’ said Lord Henry.

‘This is,’ interrupted Dorian. ‘You must admit, Harry, that

women give to men the very gold of their lives.’

‘Possibly,’ he sighed, ‘but they invariably want it back in such

very small change. That is the worry. Women, as some witty

Frenchman once put it, inspire us with the desire to do

masterpieces, and always prevent us from carrying them out.’

‘Harry, you are dreadful! I don’t know why I like you so much.’

‘You will always like me, Dorian,’ he replied. ‘Will you have

some coʃee, you fellows? – Waiter, bring coʃee, and ɹne-

champagne, and some cigarettes. No: don’t mind the cigarettes; I

have some. Basil, I can’t allow you to smoke cigars. You must have a

cigarette. A cigarette is the perfect type of a perfect pleasure. It is

exquisite, and it leaves one unsatisɹed. What more can one want?

the sins you have never had the courage to commit.’

‘What nonsense you talk, Harry!’ cried the lad, taking a light

from a ɹre-breathing silver dragon that the waiter had placed on the

table. ‘Let us go down to the theatre. When Sibyl comes on the stage

you will have a new ideal of life. She will represent something to

you that you have never known.’

follow us in a hansom.’

They got up and put on their coats, sipping their coʃee standing.

The painter was silent and preoccupied. There was a gloom over

him. He could not bear this marriage, and yet it seemed to him to be

better than many other things that might have happened. After a

brougham in front of him. A strange sense of loss came over him. He

been in the past. Life had come between them…. His eyes darkened,

years older.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER VII

For some reason or other, the house was crowded that night, and

the fat Jew manager who met them at the door was beaming from

ear to ear with an oily, tremulous smile. He escorted them to their

box with a sort of pompous humility, waving his fat jewelled hands,

and talking at the top of his voice. Dorian Gray loathed him more

than ever. He felt as if he had come to look for Miranda and had

been met by Caliban.1 Lord Henry, upon the other hand, rather

liked him. At least he declared he did, and insisted on shaking him

by the hand, and assuring him that he was proud to meet a man

who had discovered a real genius and gone bankrupt over a poet.

heat was terribly oppressive, and the huge sunlight ɻamed like a

monstrous dahlia with petals of yellow ɹre. The youths in the

the side. They talked to each other across the theatre, and shared

their oranges with the tawdry girls who sat beside them. Some

women were laughing in the pit. Their voices were horribly shrill

and discordant. The sound of the popping of corks came from the

bar.

‘What a place to ɹnd one’s divinity in!’ said Lord Henry.

‘Yes!’ answered Dorian Gray. ‘It was here I found her, and she is

divine beyond all living things. When she acts you will forget

everything. These common, rough people, with their coarse faces

blood as one’s self. ’

‘The same ɻesh and blood as one’s self! Oh, I hope not!’

exclaimed Lord Henry, who was scanning the occupants of the

gallery through his opera-glass.

‘Don’t pay any attention to him, Dorian,’ said the painter. ‘I

love must be marvellous, and any girl that has the eʃect you

of their selɹshness and lend them tears for sorrows that are not their

the world. This marriage is quite right. I did not think so at ɹrst, but

I admit it now. The gods made Sibyl Vane for you. Without her you

would have been incomplete.’

‘Thanks, Basil,’ answered Dorian Gray, pressing his hand. ‘I knew

that you would understand me. Harry is so cynical, he terriɹes me.

But here is the orchestra. It is quite dreadful, but it only lasts for

about ɹve minutes. Then the curtain rises, and you will see the girl

everything that is good in me.’

of applause, Sibyl Vane stepped on to the stage. Yes, she was

feet and began to applaud. Motionless, and as one in a dream, sat

murmuring, ‘Charming! charming!’

The scene was the hall of Capulet’s house, and Romeo in his

pilgrim’s dress had entered with Mercutio and his other friends. The

band, such as it was, struck up a few bars of music, and the dance

began. Through the crowd of ungainly, shabbily-dressed actors,

Sibyl Vane moved like a creature from a ɹner world. Her body

be made of cool ivory.

Yet she was curiously listless. She showed no sign of joy when

her eyes rested on Romeo. The few words she had to speak –

Good pilgrim, you do wrong your hand too much, 

Which mannerly devotion shows in this; 

For saints have hands that pilgrims’ hands do touch, 

And palm to palm is holy palmers’ kiss –

with the brief dialogue that follows, were spoken in a thoroughly

artiɹcial manner. The voice was exquisite, but from the point of

view of tone it was absolutely false. It was wrong in colour. It took

away all the life from the verse. It made the passion unreal.

Dorian Gray grew pale as he watched her. He was puzzled and

anxious. Neither of his friends dared to say anything to him. She

seemed to them to be absolutely incompetent. They were horribly

disappointed.

Yet they felt that the true test of any Juliet is the balcony scene

of the second act. They waited for that. If she failed there, there was

nothing in her.

She looked charming as she came out in the moonlight. That

could not be denied. But the staginess of her acting was unbearable,

and grew worse as she went on. Her gestures became absurdly

artiɹcial. She over-emphasized everything that she had to say. The

beautiful passage –

Thou knowest the mask of night is on my face, 

Else would a maiden blush bepaint my cheek 

For that which thou hast heard me speak to-night –

was declaimed with the painful precision of a school-girl who has

been taught to recite by some second-rate professor of elocution.

When she leaned over the balcony and came to those wonderful

lines –

                                                                      Although I joy in thee, 

I have no joy of this contract to-night: 

It is too rash, too unadvised, too sudden; 

Too like the lightning, which doth cease to be 

Ere one can say, ‘It lightens.’ Sweet, good-night! 

This bud of love by summer’s ripening breath 

May prove a beauteous ɻower when next we meet –

she spoke the words as though they conveyed no meaning to her. It

was not nervousness. Indeed, so far from being nervous, she was

absolutely self-contained. It was simply bad art. She was a complete

failure.

Even the common, uneducated audience of the pit and gallery

lost their interest in the play. They got restless, and began to talk

loudly and to whistle. The Jew manager, who was standing at the

back of the dress-circle, stamped and swore with rage. The only

person unmoved was the girl herself.

When the second act was over there came a storm of hisses, and

Lord Henry got up from his chair and put on his coat. ‘She is quite

beautiful, Dorian,’ he said, ‘but she can’t act. Let us go.’

‘I am going to see the play through,’ answered the lad, in a hard,

bitter voice. ‘I am awfully sorry that I have made you waste an

evening, Harry. I apologize to you both.’

‘My dear Dorian, I should think Miss Vane was ill,’ interrupted

Hallward. ‘We will come some other night.’

‘I wish she were ill,’ he rejoined. ‘But she seems to me to be

simply callous and cold. She has entirely altered. Last night she was

actress.’

more wonderful thing than Art.’

‘They are both simply forms of imitation,’ remarked Lord Henry.

‘But do let us go. Dorian, you must not stay here any longer. It is not

will want your wife to act. So what does it matter if she plays Juliet

like a wooden doll? She is very lovely, and if she knows as little

about life as she does about acting, she will be a delightful

experience. Thereare only two kinds of people who are really

who know absolutely nothing. Good heavens, my dear boy, don’t

emotion that is unbecoming. Come to the club with Basil and

Vane. She is beautiful. What more can you want?’

‘Go away, Harry,’ cried the lad. ‘I want to be alone. Basil, you

must go. Ah! can’t you see that my heart is breaking?’ The hot tears

came to his eyes. His lips trembled, and, rushing to the back of the

box, he leaned up against the wall, hiding his face in his hands.

‘Let us go, Basil,’ said Lord Henry, with a strange tenderness in

his voice; and the two young men passed out together.

A few moments afterwards the footlights ɻared up, and the

curtain rose on the third act. Dorian Gray went back to his seat. He

a titter, and some groans.

As soon as it was over, Dorian Gray rushed behind the scenes

some secret of their own.

When he entered, she looked at him, and an expression of

inɹnite joy came over her. ‘How badly I acted to-night, Dorian!’ she

cried.

‘Horribly!’ he answered, gazing at her in amazement – ‘horribly!

It was dreadful. Are you ill? You have no idea what it was. You have

no idea what I suʃered.’

The girl smiled. ‘Dorian,’ she answered, lingering over his name

with long-drawn music in her voice, as though it were sweeter than

honey to the red petals of her mouth – ‘Dorian, you should have

understood. But you understand now, don’t you?’

‘Understand what?’ he asked, angrily.

‘Why I was so bad to-night. Why I shall always be bad. Why I

shall never act well again.’

He shrugged his shoulders. ‘You are ill, I suppose. When you are

ill you shouldn’t act. You make yourself ridiculous. My friends are

bored. I was bored.’

An ecstasy of happiness dominated her.

‘Dorian, Dorian,’ she cried, ‘before I knew you, acting was the

one reality of my life. It was only in the theatre that I lived. I

thought that it was all true. I was Rosalind one night, and Portia the

were mine also.2 I believed in everything. The common people who

acted with me seemed to me to be godlike. The painted scenes were

my world. I knew nothing but shadows, and I thought them real.

You came – oh, my beautiful love! – and you freed my soul from

prison. You taught me what reality really is. To-night, for the ɹrst

time in my life, I saw through the hollowness, the sham, the silliness

of the empty pageant in which I had always played. To-night, for

the ɹrst time, I became conscious that the Romeo was hideous, and

old, and painted, that the moonlight in the orchard was false, that

the scenery was vulgar, and that the words I had to speak were

unreal, were not my words, were not what I wanted to say. You had

brought me something higher, something of which all art is but a

reɻection. You had made me understand what love really is. My

love! my love! Prince Charming! Prince of life! I have grown sick of

shadows.3 You are more to me than all art can ever be. What have I

to do with the puppets of a play? When I came on to-night, I could

not understand how it was that everything had gone from me. I

thought that I was going to be wonderful. I found that I could do

me to play at being in love. You have made me see that.’

He ɻung himself down on the sofa, and turned away his face.

‘You have killed my love,’ he muttered.

She looked at him in wonder, and laughed. He made no answer.

She came across to him, and with her little ɹngers stroked his hair.

She knelt down and pressed his hands to her lips. He drew them

away, and a shudder ran through him.

Then he leaped up, and went to the door. ‘Yes,’ he cried, ‘you

have killed my love. You used to stir my imagination. Now you

don’t even stir my curiosity. You simply produce no eʃect. I loved

you because you were marvellous, because you had genius and

intellect, because you realized the dreams of great poets and gave

shape and substance to the shadows of art. You have thrown it all

away. You are shallow and stupid. My God! how mad I was to love

you! What a fool I have been! You are nothing to me now. I will

never see you again. I will never think of you. I will never mention

your name. You don’t know what you were to me, once. Why,

once… Oh, I can’t bear to think of it! I wish I had never laid eyes

face.’

The girl grew white, and trembled. She clenched her hands

serious, Dorian?’ she murmured. ‘You are acting.’

‘Acting! I leave that to you. You do it so well,’ he answered,

bitterly.

She rose from her knees, and, with a piteous expression of pain

in her face, came across the room to him. She put her hand upon his

arm, and looked into his eyes. He thrust her back. ‘Don’t touch me!’

he cried.

A low moan broke from her, and she ɻung herself at his feet, and

lay there like a trampled ɻower. ‘Dorian, Dorian, don’t leave me!’

she whispered. ‘I am so sorry I didn’t act well. I was thinking of you

all the time. But I will try – indeed, I will try. It came so suddenly

across me, my love for you. I think I should never have known it if

again, my love. Don’t go away from me. I couldn’t bear it. Oh! don’t

go away from me. My brother… No; never mind. He didn’t mean it.

He was in jest…. But you, oh! can’t you forgive me for to-night? I

will work so hard, and try to improve. Don’t be cruel to me because

I love you better than anything in the world. After all, it is only once

melodramatic. Her tears and sobs annoyed him.

‘I am going,’ he said at last, in his calm, clear voice. ‘I don’t wish

to be unkind, but I can’t see you again. You have disappointed me.’

She wept silently, and made no answer, but crept nearer. Her

was out of the theatre.

Where he went to he hardly knew. He remembered wandering

through dimly-lit streets, past gaunt black-shadowed archways and

evil-looking houses. Women with hoarse voices and harsh laughter

had called after him. Drunkards had reeled by cursing, and

chattering to themselves like monstrous apes. He had seen grotesque

children huddled upon doorsteps, and heard shrieks and oaths from

gloomy courts.

As the dawn was just breaking he found himself close to Covent

Garden.4 The darkness lifted, and, ɻushed with faint ɹres, the sky

oʃered him some cherries. He thanked him, wondered why he

refused to accept any money for them, and began to eat them

crates of striped tulips, and of yellow and red roses, deɹled in front

auction to be over. Others crowded round the swinging doors of the

coʃee-house in the Piazza. The heavy cart-horses slipped and

Some of the drivers were lying asleep on a pile of sacks. Iris-necked,

and pink-footed, the pigeons ran about picking up seeds.

After a little while, he hailed a hansom, and drove home. For a

few moments he loitered upon the doorstep, looking round at the

silent Square with its blank close-shuttered windows, and its staring

blinds. The sky was pure opal now, and the roofs of the houses

wreath of smoke was rising. It curled, a violet riband, through the

nacre-coloured air.

the door, his eye fell upon the portrait Basil Hallward had painted of

out of his coat, he seemed to hesitate. Finally he came back, went

struggled through the cream-coloured silk blinds, the face appeared

would have said that there was a touch of cruelty in the mouth. It

was certainly strange.5

He turned round, and, walking to the window, drew up the

blind. The bright dawn ɻooded the room, and swept the fantastic

shadows into dusky corners, where they lay shuddering. But the

strange expression that he had noticed in the face of the portrait

seemed to linger there, to be more intensiɹed even. The quivering,

some dreadful thing.

ivory Cupids, one of Lord Henry’s many presents to him, glanced

lips. What did it mean?

He rubbed his eyes, and came close to the picture, and examined

actual painting, and yet there was no doubt that the whole

thing was horribly apparent.

He threw himself into a chair, and began to think. Suddenly

there ɻashed across his mind what he had said in Basil Hallward’s

studio the day the picture had been ɹnished. Yes, he remembered it

perfectly. He had uttered a mad wish that he himself might remain

young, and the portrait grow old; that his own beauty might be

untarnished, and the face on the canvas bear the burden of his

passions and his sins; that the painted image might be seared with

the lines of suʃering and thought, and that he might keep all the

delicate bloom and loveliness of his then just conscious boyhood.

Surely his wish had not been fulɹlled? Such things were impossible.

It seemed monstrous even to think of them. And, yet, there was the

picture before him, with the touch of cruelty in the mouth.

Cruelty! Had he been cruel? It was the girl’s fault, not his. He

had dreamed of her as a great artist, had given his love to her

they took lovers, it was merely to have some one with whom they

could have scenes. Lord Henry had told him that, and Lord Henry

knew what women were. Why should he trouble about Sibyl Vane?

She was nothing to him now.

But the picture? What was he to say of that? It held the secret of

his life, and told his story. It had taught him to love his own beauty.

Would it teach him to loathe his own soul? Would he ever look at it

again?

No; it was merely an illusion wrought on the troubled senses.

The horrible night that he had passed had left phantoms behind it.

Suddenly there had fallen upon his brain that tiny scarlet speck that

so.

pure.

He got up from his chair, and drew a large screen right in front

murmured to himself, and he walked across to the window and

opened it. When he stepped out on to the grass, he drew a deep

breath. The fresh morning air seemed to drive away all his sombre

back to him. He repeated her name over and over again. The birds

that were singing in the dew-drenched garden seemed to be telling

the ɻowers about her.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER VIII

It was long past noon when he awoke. His valet had crept several

times on tiptoe into the room to see if he was stirring, and had

wondered what made his young master sleep so late. Finally his bell

sounded, and Victor came in softly with a cup of tea, and a pile of

letters, on a small tray of old Sèvres china, and drew back the olive-

satin curtains, with their shimmering blue lining, that hung in front

of the three tall windows.

‘Monsieur has well slept this morning,’ he said, smiling.

‘What o’clock is it, Victor?’ asked Dorian Gray, drowsily.

‘One hour and a quarter, Monsieur.’

How late it was! He sat up, and, having sipped some tea, turned

over his letters. One of them was from Lord Henry, and had been

brought by hand that morning. He hesitated for a moment, and then

put it aside. The others he opened listlessly. They contained the

usual collection of cards, invitations to dinner, tickets for private

views, programmes of charity concerts, and the like, that are

showered on fashionable young men every morning during the

season. There was a rather heavy bill, for a chased silver Louis-

Quinze toilet-set, that he had not yet had the courage to send on to

his guardians, who were extremely old-fashioned people and did not

realize that we live in an age when unnecessary things are our only

necessities; and there were several very courteously worded

communications from Jermyn Street money-lenders oʃering to

reasonable rates of interest.

once or twice, but there was the unreality of a dream about it.

As soon as he was dressed, he went into the library and sat down

to a light French breakfast, that had been laid out for him on a small

warm air seemed laden with spices. A bee ɻew in, and buzzed round

before him. He felt perfectly happy.

Suddenly his eye fell on the screen that he had placed in front of

the portrait, and he started.

‘Too cold for Monsieur?’ asked his valet, putting an omelette on

the table. ‘I shut the window?’

Dorian shook his head. ‘I am not cold,’ he murmured.

Was it all true? Had the portrait really changed? Or had it been

simply his own imagination that had made him see a look of evil

where there had been a look of joy? Surely a painted canvas could

not alter? The thing was absurd. It would serve as a tale to tell Basil

some day. It would make him smile.

Victor,’ he said, with a sigh. The man bowed and retired.

Then he rose from the table, lit a cigarette, and ɻung himself

wrought with a rather ɻorid Louis-Quatorze pattern. He scanned it

curiously, wondering if ever before it had concealed the secret of a

man’s life.

Should he move it aside, after all? Why not let it stay there?

What was the use of knowing? If the thing was true, it was terrible.

If it was not true, why trouble about it? But what if, by some fate or

deadlier chance, eyes other than his spied behind, and saw the

horrible change? What should he do if Basil Hallward came and

asked to look at his own picture? Basil would be sure to do that. No;

the thing had to be examined, and at once. Anything would be

better than this dreadful state of doubt.

portrait had altered.

As he often remembered afterwards, and always with no small

wonder, he found himself at ɹrst gazing at the portrait with a

some subtle aɽnity between the chemical atoms, that shaped

was within him? Could it be that what that soul thought, they

realized?1 – that what it dreamed, they made true? Or was there

some other, more terrible reason? He shuddered, and felt afraid,

and, going back to the couch, lay there, gazing at the picture in

sickened horror.

One thing, however, he felt that it had done for him. It had made

him conscious how unjust, how cruel, he had been to Sibyl Vane. It

was not too late to make reparation for that. She could still be his

wife. His unreal and selɹsh love would yield to some higher

inɻuence, would be transformed into some nobler passion, and the

portrait that Basil Hallward had painted of him would be a guide to

him through life, would be to him what holiness is to some, and

conscience to others, and the fear of God to us all. There were

opiates for remorse, drugs that could lull the moral sense to sleep.

ever-present sign of the ruin men brought upon their souls.

way through the sanguine labyrinth of passion through which he

was wandering. He did not know what to do, or what to think.

the girl he had loved, imploring her forgiveness, and accusing

himself of madness. He covered page after page with wild words of

blame us. It is the confession, not the priest, that gives us

absolution. When Dorian had ɹnished the letter, he felt that he had

been forgiven.

Suddenly there came a knock to the door, and he heard Lord

once. I can’t bear your shutting yourself up like this.’

He made no answer at ɹrst, but remained quite still. The

knocking still continued, and grew louder. Yes, it was better to let

Lord Henry in, and to explain to him the new life he was going to

lead, to quarrel with him if it became necessary to quarrel, to part if

parting was inevitable. He jumped up, drew the screen hastily across

the picture, and unlocked the door.

‘But you must not think too much about it.’

‘Do you mean about Sibyl Vane?’ asked the lad.

‘Yes, of course,’ answered Lord Henry, sinking into a chair, and

slowly pulling oʃ his yellow gloves. ‘It is dreadful, from one point of

view, but it was not your fault. Tell me, did you go behind and see

her, after the play was over?’

‘Yes.’

‘I felt sure you had. Did you make a scene with her?’

‘I was brutal, Harry – perfectly brutal. But it is all right now. I

am not sorry for anything that has happened. It has taught me to

know myself better.’

‘Ah, Dorian, I am so glad you take it in that way! I was afraid I

would ɹnd you plunged in remorse, and tearing that nice curly hair

of yours.’

‘I have got through all that,’ said Dorian, shaking his head, and

smiling. ‘I am perfectly happy now. I know what conscience is, to

begin with. It is not what you told me it was. It is the divinest thing

in us. Don’t sneer at it, Harry, any more – at least not before me. I

want to be good. I can’t bear the idea of my soul being hideous.’

‘A very charming artistic basis for ethics, Dorian! I congratulate

you on it. But how are you going to begin?’

‘By marrying Sibyl Vane.’

looking at him in perplexed amazement. ‘But, my dear Dorian –’

‘Yes, Harry, I know what you are going to say. Something

going to break my word to her. She is to be my wife.’

‘Your wife! Dorian!… Didn’t you get my letter? I wrote to you

this morning, and sent the note down, by my own man.’

‘Your letter? Oh, yes, I remember. I have not read it yet, Harry. I

was afraid there might be something in it that I wouldn’t like. You

cut life to pieces with your epigrams.’

‘You know nothing then?’

‘What do you mean?’

Lord Henry walked across the room, and, sitting down by Dorian

Gray, took both his hands in his own, and held them tightly.

‘Dorian,’ he said, ‘my letter – don’t be frightened – was to tell you

that Sibyl Vane is dead.’

A cry of pain broke from the lad’s lips, and he leaped to his feet,

tearing his hands away from Lord Henry’s grasp. ‘Dead! Sibyl dead!

It is not true! It is a horrible lie! How dare you say it?’

‘It is quite true, Dorian,’ said Lord Henry, gravely. ‘It is in all the

morning papers. I wrote down to you to ask you not to see any one

till I came. There will have to be an inquest, of course, and you

must not be mixed up in it. Things like that make a man fashionable

name at the theatre? If they don’t, it is all right. Did any one see you

going round to her room? That is an important point.’

Dorian did not answer for a few moments. He was dazed with

can’t bear it! But be quick. Tell me everything at once.’

‘I have no doubt it was not an accident, Dorian, though it must

be put in that way to the public. It seems that as she was leaving the

dead on the ɻoor of her dressing-room. She had swallowed

in it. I should fancy it was prussic acid, as she seems to have died

instantaneously.’

‘Harry, Harry, it is terrible!’ cried the lad.

‘Yes; it is very tragic, of course, but you must not get yourself

mixed up in it. I see by The Standard that she was seventeen. I

should have thought she was almost younger than that. She looked

such a child, and seemed to know so little about acting. Dorian, you

mustn’t let this thing get on your nerves. You must come and dine

with me, and afterwards we will look in at the Opera. It is a Patti2

night, and everybody will be there. You can come to my sister’s box.

She has got some smart women with her.’

‘So I have murdered Sibyl Vane,’ said Dorian Gray, half to

himself – ‘murdered her as surely as if I had cut her little throat

with a knife. Yet the roses are not less lovely for all that. The birds

sing just as happily in my garden. And to-night I am to dine with

you, and then go on to the Opera, and sup somewhere, I suppose,

afterwards. How extraordinarily dramatic life is! If I had read all

this in a book, Harry, I think I would have wept over it. Somehow,

now that it has happened actually, and to me, it seems far too

wonderful for tears. Here is the ɹrst passionate love-letter I have

ever written in my life. Strange, that my ɹrst passionate love-letter

should have been addressed to a dead girl. Can they feel, I wonder,

those white silent people we call the dead? Sibyl! Can she feel, or

know, or listen? Oh, Harry, how I loved her once! It seems years ago

to me now. She was everything to me. Then came that dreadful

night – was it really only last night? – when she played so badly,

and my heart almost broke. She explained it all to me. It was

terribly pathetic. But I was not moved a bit. I thought her shallow.

Suddenly something happened that made me afraid. I can’t tell you

what it was, but it was terrible. I said I would go back to her. I felt I

had done wrong. And now she is dead. My God! my God! Harry,

what shall I do? You don’t know the danger I am in, and there is

nothing to keep me straight. She would have done that for me. She

had no right to kill herself. It was selɹsh of her.’

he loses all possible interest in life. If you had married this girl you

nothing. But she would have soon found out that you were

very smart bonnets that some other woman’s husband has to pay

that in any case the whole thing would have been an absolute

failure.’

‘I suppose it would,’ muttered the lad, walking up and down the

room, and looking horribly pale. ‘But I thought it was my duty. It is

was right. I remember your saying once that there is a fatality about

good resolutions – that they are always made too late. Mine

certainly were.’

‘Good resolutions are useless attempts to interfere with scientiɹc

laws. Their origin is pure vanity. Their result is absolutely nil. They

have a certain charm for the weak. That is all that can be said for

have no account.’

him, ‘why is it that I cannot feel this tragedy as much as I want to? I

don’t think I am heartless. Do you?’

‘You have done too many foolish things during the last fortnight

to be entitled to give yourself that name, Dorian,’ answered Lord

Henry, with his sweet, melancholy smile.

The lad frowned. ‘I don’t like that explanation, Harry,’ he

rejoined, ‘but I am glad you don’t think I am heartless. I am nothing

of the kind. I know I am not. And yet I must admit that this thing

that has happened does not aʃect me as it should. It seems to me to

be simply like a wonderful ending to a wonderful play. It has all the

terrible beauty of a Greek tragedy, a tragedy in which I took a great

part, but by which I have not been wounded.’

‘It is an interesting question,’ said Lord Henry, who found an

exquisite pleasure in playing on the lad’s unconscious egotism – ‘an

extremely interesting question. I fancy that the true explanation is

this. It often happens that the real tragedies of life occur in such an

inartistic manner that they hurt us by their crude violence, their

lack of style. They aʃect us just as vulgarity aʃects us. They give us

an impression of sheer brute force, and we revolt against that.

beauty crosses our lives. If these elements of beauty are real, the

whole thing simply appeals to our sense of dramatic eʃect.

Suddenly we ɹnd that we are no longer the actors, but the

herself for love of you. I wish that I had ever had such an

long after I had ceased to care for them, or they to care for me. They

once for reminiscences. That awful memory of woman! What a

remember its details. Details are always vulgar.’

‘I must sow poppies in my garden,’ sighed Dorian.

‘There is no necessity,’ rejoined his companion. ‘Life has always

poppies in her hands. Of course, now and then things linger. I once

wore nothing but violets all through one season, as a form of artistic

It ɹlls one with the terror of eternity. Well – would you believe it? –

buried my romance in a bed of asphodel.3 She dragged it out again,

and assured me that I had spoiled her life. I am bound to state that

she ate an enormous dinner, so I did not feel any anxiety. But what

a lack of taste she showed! The one charm of the past is that it is the

past. But women never know when the curtain has fallen. They

always want a sixth act, and as soon as the interest of the play is

entirely over they propose to continue it. If they were allowed their

own way, every comedy would have a tragic ending, and every

tragedy would culminate in a farce. They are charmingly artiɹcial,

but they have no sense of art. You are more fortunate than I am. I

have done for me what Sibyl Vane did for you. Ordinary women

always console themselves. Some of them do it by going in for

sentimental colours. Never trust a woman who wears mauve,

whatever her age may be, or a woman over thirty-ɹve who is fond

of pink ribbons. It always means that they have a history. Others

ɹnd a great consolation in suddenly discovering the good qualities

of their husbands. They ɻaunt their conjugal felicity in one’s face, as

if it were the most fascinating of sins. Religion consoles some. Its

mysteries have all the charm of a ɻirtation, a woman once told me;

and I can quite understand it. Besides, nothing makes one so vain as

being told that one is a sinner. Conscience makes egotists of us all.4

Yes; there is really no end to the consolations that women ɹnd in

modern life. Indeed, I have not mentioned the most important one.’

‘What is that, Harry?’ said the lad, listlessly.

‘Oh, the obvious consolation. Taking some one else’s admirer

when one loses one’s own. In good society that always whitewashes

things we all play with, such as romance, passion, and love.’

‘I was terribly cruel to her. You forget that.’

‘I am afraid that women appreciate cruelty, downright cruelty,

more than anything else. They have wonderfully primitive instincts.

We have emancipated them, but they remain slaves looking for their

but I can fancy how delightful you looked. And, after all, you said

something to me the day before yesterday that seemed to me at the

time to be merely fanciful, but that I see now was absolutely true,

and it holds the key to everything.’

‘What was that, Harry?’

‘You said to me that Sibyl Vane represented to you all the

heroines of romance – that she was Desdemona one night, and

Ophelia the other; that if she died as Juliet, she came to life as

Imogen.’

‘She will never come to life again now,’ muttered the lad,

burying his face in his hands.

wonderful scene from Webster, or Ford, or Cyril Tourneur.5 The girl

never really lived, and so she has never really died. To you at least

she was always a dream, a phantom that ɻitted through

Shakespeare’s plays and left them lovelier for its presence, a reed

through which Shakespeare’s music sounded richer and more full of

joy. The moment she touched actual life, she marred it, and it

marred her, and so she passed away. Mourn for Ophelia, if you like.

Put ashes on your head because Cordelia was strangled. Cry out

waste your tears over Sibyl Vane. She was less real than they are.’

There was a silence. The evening darkened in the room.

Noiselessly, and with silver feet, the shadows crept in from the

garden. The colours faded wearily out of things.

After some time Dorian Gray looked up. ‘You have explained me

to myself, Harry,’ he murmured, with something of a sigh of relief. ‘I

felt all that you have said, but somehow I was afraid of it, and I

could not express it to myself. How well you know me! But we will

not talk again of what has happened. It has been a marvellous

experience. That is all. I wonder if life has still in store for me

anything as marvellous.’

‘Life has everything in store for you, Dorian. There is nothing

that you, with your extraordinary good looks, will not be able to

do.’

‘But suppose, Harry, I became haggard, and old, and wrinkled?

What then?’

‘Ah, then,’ said Lord Henry, rising to go – ‘then, my dear Dorian,

you would have to ɹght for your victories. As it is, they are brought

We cannot spare you. And now you had better dress, and drive

down to the club. We are rather late, as it is.’

‘I think I shall join you at the Opera, Harry. I feel too tired to eat

anything. What is the number of your sister’s box?’

‘Twenty-seven, I believe. It is on the grand tier. You will see her

name on the door. But I am sorry you won’t come and dine.’

‘I don’t feel up to it,’ said Dorian, listlessly. ‘But I am awfully

obliged to you for all that you have said to me. You are certainly my

best friend. No one has ever understood me as you have.’

‘We are only at the beginning of our friendship, Dorian,’

answered Lord Henry, shaking him by the hand. ‘Good-bye. I shall

see you before nine-thirty, I hope. Remember, Patti is singing.’

As he closed the door behind him, Dorian Gray touched the bell,

and in a few minutes Victor appeared with the lamps and drew the

blinds down. He waited impatiently for him to go. The man seemed

to take an interminable time over everything.

shuddering as he hoped it.

Poor Sibyl! what a romance it had all been! She had often

mimicked death on the stage. Then Death himself had touched her,

and taken her with him. How had she played that dreadful last

scene? Had she cursed him, as she died? No; she had died for love of

him, and love would always be a sacrament to him now. She had

to his eyes as he remembered her childlike look and winsome

fanciful ways and shy tremulous grace. He brushed them away

hastily, and looked again at the picture.6

He felt that the time had really come for making his choice. Or

had his choice already been made? Yes, life had decided that for

burden of his shame: that was all.

A feeling of pain crept over him as he thought of the desecration

almost enamoured of it, as it seemed to him at times. Was it to alter

now with every mood to which he yielded? Was it to become a

brighter gold the waving wonder of its hair? The pity of it! the pity

of it!

For a moment he thought of praying that the horrible sympathy

that existed between him and the picture might cease. It had

changed in answer to a prayer; perhaps in answer to a prayer it

might remain unchanged. And, yet, who, that knew anything about

Life, would surrender the chance of remaining always young,

however fantastic that chance might be, or with what fateful

control? Had it indeed been prayer that had produced the

substitution? Might there not be some curious scientiɹc reason for it

prayer any terrible power. If the picture was to alter, it was to alter.

That was all. Why inquire too closely into it?7

For there would be a real pleasure in watching it. He would be

able to follow his mind into its secret places. This portrait would be

to him the most magical of mirrors. As it had revealed to him his

own body, so it would reveal to him his own soul. And when winter

came upon it, he would still be standing where spring trembles on

the verge of summer. When the blood crept from its face, and left

behind a pallid mask of chalk with leaden eyes, he would keep the

glamour of boyhood. Not one blossom of his loveliness would ever

fade. Not one pulse of his life would ever weaken. Like the gods of

the Greeks, he would be strong, and ɻeet, and joyous. What did it

matter what happened to the coloured image on the canvas? He

would be safe. That was everything.

He drew the screen back into its former place in front of the

picture, smiling as he did so, and passed into his bedroom, where

his valet was already waiting for him. An hour later he was at the

Opera, and Lord Henry was leaning over his chair.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER IX

As he was sitting at breakfast next morning, Basil Hallward was

shown into the room.

‘I am so glad I have found you, Dorian,’ he said, gravely. ‘I called

last night, and they told me you were at the Opera. Of course I knew

that was impossible. But I wish you had left word where you had

really gone to. I passed a dreadful evening, half afraid that one

tragedy might be followed by another. I think you might have

telegraphed for me when you heard of it ɹrst. I read of it quite by

chance in a late edition of The Globe, that I picked up at the club. I

came here at once, and was miserable at not ɹnding you. I can’t tell

you how heartbroken I am about the whole thing. I know what you

must suʃer. But where were you? Did you go down and see the

girl’s mother? For a moment I thought of following you there. They

gave the address in the paper. Somewhere in the Euston Road, isn’t

it? But I was afraid of intruding upon a sorrow that I could not

lighten. Poor woman! What a state she must be in! And her only

child, too! What did she say about it all?’

‘My dear Basil, how do I know?’ murmured Dorian Gray, sipping

some pale-yellow wine from a delicate gold-beaded bubble of

Venetian glass, and looking dreadfully bored. ‘I was at the Opera.

You should have come on there. I met Lady Gwendolen, Harry’s

sister, for the ɹrst time. We were in her box. She is perfectly

charming; and Patti sang divinely. Don’t talk about horrid subjects.

something. And now, tell me about yourself and what you are

painting.’

‘You went to the Opera?’ said Hallward, speaking very slowly,

sleep in? Why, man, there are horrors in store for that little white

body of hers!’

‘Stop, Basil! I won’t hear it!’ cried Dorian, leaping to his feet.

past is past.’

‘You call yesterday the past?’

‘What has the actual lapse of time got to do with it? It is only

shallow people who require years to get rid of an emotion. A man

who is master of himself can end a sorrow as easily as he can invent

a pleasure. I don’t want to be at the mercy of my emotions. I want

to use them, to enjoy them, and to dominate them.’

‘Dorian, this is horrible! Something has changed you completely.

You look exactly the same wonderful boy who, day after day, used

to come down to my studio to sit for his picture. But you were

inɻuence. I see that.’

The lad ɻushed up, and, going to the window, looked out for a

great deal to Harry, Basil,’ he said, at last – ‘more than I owe to you.

You only taught me to be vain.’

‘Well, I am punished for that, Dorian – or shall be some day.’

‘I don’t know what you mean, Basil,’ he exclaimed, turning

round. ‘I don’t know what you want. What do you want?’

‘I want the Dorian Gray I used to paint,’ said the artist sadly.

‘Basil,’ said the lad, going over to him, and putting his hand on

his shoulder, ‘you have come too late. Yesterday when I heard that

Sibyl Vane had killed herself –’

‘Killed herself! Good heavens! is there no doubt about that?’

cried Hallward, looking up at him with an expression of horror.

‘My dear Basil! Surely you don’t think it was a vulgar accident?

Of course she killed herself.’

The elder man buried his face in his hands. ‘How fearful,’ he

muttered, and a shudder ran through him.

‘No,’ said Dorian Gray, ‘there is nothing fearful about it. It is one

of the great romantic tragedies of the age. As a rule, people who act

lead the most commonplace lives. They are good husbands, or

Even Harry, who was here, who brought me the news, in fact, had

passed away. I cannot repeat an emotion. No one can, except

and you are furious. How like a sympathetic person! You remind me

twenty years of his life in trying to get some grievance redressed, or

some unjust law altered – I forget exactly what it was. Finally he

succeeded, and nothing could exceed his disappointment. He had

absolutely nothing to do, almost died of ennui, and became a

conɹrmed misanthrope. And besides, my dear old Basil, if you really

want to console me, teach me rather to forget what has happened,

or to see it from a proper artistic point of view. Was it not Gautier1

who used to write about la consolation des arts? I remember picking

told me of when we were down at Marlow2 together, the young man

who used to say that yellow satin could console one for all the

miseries of life. I love beautiful things that one can touch and

handle. Old brocades, green bronzes, lacquer-work, carved ivories,

exquisite surroundings, luxury, pomp, there is much to be got from

all these. But the artistic temperament that they create, or at any

rate reveal, is still more to me. To become the spectator of one’s

own life, as Harry says, is to escape the suʃering of life. I know you

are surprised at my talking to you like this. You have not realized

man now. I have new passions, new thoughts, new ideas. I am

diʃerent, but you must not like me less. I am changed, but you must

always be my friend. Of course I am very fond of Harry. But I know

that you are better than he is. You are not stronger – you are too

much afraid of life – but you are better. And how happy we used to

be together! Don’t leave me, Basil, and don’t quarrel with me. I am

what I am. There is nothing more to be said.’

The painter felt strangely moved.3 The lad was inɹnitely dear to

him, and his personality had been the great turning-point in his art.

He could not bear the idea of reproaching him any more. After all,

his indiʃerence was probably merely a mood that would pass away.

There was so much in him that was good, so much in him that was

noble.

‘Well, Dorian,’ he said, at length, with a sad smile, ‘I won’t speak

take place this afternoon. Have they summoned you?’

Dorian shook his head, and a look of annoyance passed over his

name,’ he answered.

‘But surely she did?’

‘Only my Christian name, and that I am quite sure she never

mentioned to any one. She told me once that they were all rather

curious to learn who I was, and that she invariably told them my

name was Prince Charming. It was pretty of her. You must do me a

drawing of Sibyl, Basil. I should like to have something more of her

than the memory of a few kisses and some broken pathetic words.’

‘I will try and do something, Dorian, if it would please you. But

you must come and sit to me yourself again. I can’t get on without

you.’

‘I can never sit to you again, Basil. It is impossible!’ he

exclaimed, starting back.

The painter stared at him. ‘My dear boy, what nonsense!’ he

is it? Why have you pulled the screen in front of it? Let me look at

it. It is the best thing I have ever done. Do take the screen away,

that. I felt the room looked diʃerent as I came in.’

let him arrange my room for me. He settles my ɻowers for me

sometimes – that is all. No; I did it myself. The light was too strong

on the portrait.’

‘Too strong! Surely not, my dear fellow? It is an admirable place

for it. Let me see it.’ And Hallward walked towards the corner of the

room.

A cry of terror broke from Dorian Gray’s lips, and he rushed

between the painter and the screen. ‘Basil,’ he said, looking very

pale, ‘you must not look at it. I don’t wish you to.’

‘Not look at my own work! you are not serious. Why shouldn’t I

look at it?’ exclaimed Hallward, laughing.

‘If you try to look at it, Basil, on my word of honour I will never

speak to you again as long as I live. I am quite serious. I don’t oʃer

any explanation, and you are not to ask for any. But, remember, if

you touch this screen, everything is over between us.’

Hallward was thunderstruck. He looked at Dorian Gray in

absolute amazement. He had never seen him like this before. The

lad was actually pallid with rage. His hands were clenched, and the

pupils of his eyes were like disks of blue ɹre. He was trembling all

over.

‘Dorian!’

‘Don’t speak!’

‘But what is the matter? Of course I won’t look at it if you don’t

want me to,’ he said, rather coldly, turning on his heel, and going

Paris in the autumn. I shall probably have to give it another coat of

varnish before that, so I must see it some day, and why not to-day?’

‘To exhibit it! You want to exhibit it?’ exclaimed Dorian Gray, a

strange sense of terror creeping over him. Was the world going to be

That was impossible. Something – he did not know what – had to be

done at once.

‘Yes; I don’t suppose you will object to that. Georges Petit is

going to collect all my best pictures for a special exhibition in the

Rue de Séze,4 which will open the ɹrst week in October. The

portrait will only be away a month. I should think you could easily

spare it for that time. In fact, you are sure to be out of town. And if

you keep it always behind a screen, you can’t care much about it.’

Dorian Gray passed his hand over his forehead. There were

beads of perspiration there. He felt that he was on the brink of a

horrible danger. ‘You told me a month ago that you would never

exhibit it,’ he cried. ‘Why have you changed your mind? You people

who go in for being consistent have just as many moods as others

have. The only diʃerence is that your moods are rather meaningless.

You can’t have forgotten that you assured me most solemnly that

ask him and try.

‘Basil,’ he said, coming over quite close, and looking him straight

picture?’

The painter shuddered in spite of himself. ‘Dorian, if I told you,

at me. I could not bear your doing either of those two things. If you

be hidden from the world, I am satisɹed. Your friendship is dearer

to me than any fame or reputation.’

‘No, Basil, you must tell me,’ insisted Dorian Gray. ‘I think I have

a right to know.’ His feeling of terror had passed away, and curiosity

had taken its place. He was determined to ɹnd out Basil Hallward’s

mystery.

‘Let us sit down, Dorian,’ said the painter, looking troubled. ‘Let

us sit down. And just answer me one question. Have you noticed in

did not strike you, but that revealed itself to you suddenly?’

‘Basil!’ cried the lad, clutching the arms of his chair with

trembling hands, and gazing at him with wild, startled eyes.

‘I see you did. Don’t speak. Wait till you hear what I have to say.

Dorian, from the moment I met you,5 your personality had the most

extraordinary inɻuence over me. I was dominated, soul, brain, and

power by you. You became to me the visible incarnation of that

unseen ideal whose memory haunts us artists like an exquisite

dream. I worshipped you. I grew jealous of every one to whom you

spoke. I wanted to have you all to myself. I was only happy when I

was with you. When you were away from me you were still present

in my art…. Of course I never let you know anything about this. It

would have been impossible. You would not have understood it. I

face to face, and that the world had become wonderful to my eyes –

too wonderful, perhaps, for in such mad worships there is peril, the

peril of losing them, no less than the peril of keeping them…. Weeks

and weeks went on, and I grew more and more absorbed in you.

Then came a new development. I had drawn you as Paris in dainty

armour, and as Adonis with huntsman’s cloak and polished boar-

spear. Crowned with heavy lotus-blossoms you had sat on the prow

of Adrian’s barge, gazing across the green turbid Nile. You had leant

over the still pool of some Greek woodland, and seen in the water’s

silent silver the marvel of your own face.6 And it had all been what

reveal my secret.7 I grew afraid that others would know of my

idolatry. I felt, Dorian, that I had told too much, that I had put too

much of myself into it. Then it was that I resolved never to allow

the picture to be exhibited. You were a little annoyed; but then you

about it, laughed at me. But I did not mind that. When the picture

was ɹnished, and I sat alone with it, I felt that I was right…. Well,

after a few days the thing left my studio, and as soon as I had got

rid of the intolerable fascination of its presence it seemed to me that

I had been foolish in imagining that I had seen anything in it, more

than that you were extremely good-looking and that I could paint.

Even now I cannot help feeling that it is a mistake to think that the

passion one feels in creation is ever really shown in the work one

creates. Art is always more abstract than we fancy. Form and colour

tell us of form and colour – that is all. It often seems to me that art

conceals the artist far more completely than it ever reveals him. And

so when I got this oʃer from Paris I determined to make your

portrait the principal thing in my exhibition. It never occurred to me

that you would refuse. I see now that you were right. The picture

worshipped.’

Dorian Gray drew a long breath. The colour came back to his

was safe for the time. Yet he could not help feeling inɹnite pity for

wondered if he himself would ever be so dominated by the

dangerous. But that was all.8 He was too clever and too cynical to

be really fond of. Would there ever be some one who would ɹll him

with a strange idolatry? Was that one of the things that life had in

store?

‘It is extraordinary to me, Dorian,’ said Hallward, ‘that you

should have seen this in the portrait. Did you really see it?’

‘I saw something in it,’ he answered, ‘something that seemed to

me very curious.’

‘Well, you don’t mind my looking at the thing now?’

Dorian shook his head. ‘You must not ask me that, Basil. I could

not possibly let you stand in front of that picture.’

‘You will some day, surely?’

‘Never.’

‘Well, perhaps you are right. And now good-bye, Dorian. You

have been the one person in my life who has really inɻuenced my

art.9 Whatever I have done that is good, I owe to you. Ah! you don’t

know what it cost me to tell you all that I have told you.’

‘My dear Basil,’ said Dorian, ‘what have you told me? Simply

that you felt that you admired me too much. That is not even a

compliment.’

‘It was not intended as a compliment. It was a confession. Now

that I have made it, something seems to have gone out of me.

Perhaps one should never put one’s worship into words.’

‘It was a very disappointing confession.’

‘Why, what did you expect, Dorian? You didn’t see anything else

in the picture, did you? There was nothing else to see?’

‘No; there was nothing else to see. Why do you ask? But you

mustn’t talk about worship. It is foolish. You and I are friends, Basil,

and we must always remain so.’

‘You have got Harry,’ said the painter, sadly.

‘Oh, Harry!’ cried the lad, with a ripple of laughter. ‘Harry

spends his days in saying what is incredible, and his evenings in

doing what is improbable. Just the sort of life I would like to lead.

But still I don’t think I would go to Harry if I were in trouble. I

would sooner go to you, Basil.’

‘You will sit to me again?’

‘Impossible!’

‘You spoil my life as an artist by refusing, Dorian. No man came

across two ideal things. Few come across one.’

‘I can’t explain it to you, Basil, but I must never sit to you again.

will come and have tea with you. That will be just as pleasant.’

‘Pleasanter for you, I am afraid,’ murmured Hallward,

the picture once again. But that can’t be helped. I quite understand

what you feel about it.’

As he left the room, Dorian Gray smiled to himself. Poor Basil!

How much that strange confession explained to him! The painter’s

absurd ɹts of jealousy, his wild devotion, his extravagant

friendship so coloured by romance.10

He sighed, and touched the bell. The portrait must be hidden

away at all costs. He could not run such a risk of discovery again. It

had been mad of him to have allowed the thing to remain, even for

an hour, in a room to which any of his friends had access.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER X

When his servant entered, he looked at him steadfastly, and

wondered if he had thought of peering behind the screen. The man

was quite impassive, and waited for his orders. Dorian lit a

cigarette, and walked over to the glass and glanced into it. He could

see the reɻection of Victor’s face perfectly. It was like a placid mask

of servility. There was nothing to be afraid of, there. Yet he thought

it best to be on his guard.

Speaking very slowly, he told him to tell the housekeeper that he

wanted to see her, and then to go to the frame-maker and ask him

to send two of his men round at once. It seemed to him that as the

man left the room his eyes wandered in the direction of the screen.

Or was that merely his own fancy?1

After a few moments, in her black silk dress, with old-fashioned

thread mittens on her wrinkled hands, Mrs Leaf bustled into the

library. He asked her for the key of the schoolroom.

‘The old schoolroom, Mr Dorian?’ she exclaimed. ‘Why, it is full

of dust. I must get it arranged, and put straight before you go into it.

It is not ɹt for you to see, sir. It is not, indeed.’

‘I don’t want it put straight, Leaf. I only want the key.’

‘Well, sir, you’ll be covered with cobwebs if you go into it. Why,

it hasn’t been opened for nearly ɹve years, not since his lordship

died.’

want to see the place – that is all. Give me the key.’

‘And here is the key, sir,’ said the old lady, going over the

living up there, sir, and you so comfortable here?’

‘No, no,’ he cried, petulantly. ‘Thank you, Leaf. That will do.’

She lingered for a few moments, and was garrulous over some

detail of the household. He sighed, and told her to manage things as

she thought best. She left the room, wreathed in smiles.

As the door closed, Dorian put the key in his pocket, and looked

round the room. His eye fell on a large purple satin coverlet heavily

embroidered with gold, a splendid piece of late seventeenth-century

Venetian work that his grandfather had found in a convent near

Bologna. Yes, that would serve to wrap the dreadful thing in. It had

something that had a corruption of its own, worse than the

corruption of death itself – something that would breed horrors and

yet would never die. What the worm was to the corpse, his sins

would be to the painted image on the canvas. They would mar its

beauty, and eat away its grace. They would deɹle it, and make it

shameful. And yet the thing would still live on. It would be always

alive.

had known, and Montaigne, and Winckelmann, and Shakespeare

himself.2 Yes, Basil could have saved him. But it was too late now.

The past could always be annihilated. Regret, denial, or

forgetfulness could do that. But the future was inevitable. There

were passions in him that would ɹnd their terrible outlet, dreams

that would make the shadow of their real evil.

He took up from the couch the great purple-and-gold texture that

covered it, and, holding it in his hands, passed behind the screen.

Was the face on the canvas viler than before? It seemed to him that

it was unchanged; and yet his loathing of it was intensiɹed. Gold

hair, blue eyes, and rose-red lips–they all were there. It was simply

the expression that had altered. That was horrible in its cruelty.

Compared to what he saw in it of censure or rebuke, how shallow

Basil’s reproaches about Sibyl Vane had been! – how shallow, and of

what little account! His own soul was looking out at him from the

canvas and calling him to judgment. A look of pain came across

him, and he ɻung the rich pall over the picture. As he did so, a

knock came to the door. He passed out as his servant entered.

‘The persons are here, Monsieur.’

He felt that the man must be got rid of at once. He must not be

allowed to know where the picture was being taken to. There was

asking him to send him round something to read, and reminding

him that they were to meet at eight-ɹfteen that evening.

‘Wait for an answer,’ he said, handing it to him, ‘and show the

men in here.’

In two or three minutes there was another knock, and Mr

Hubbard himself, the celebrated frame-maker of South Audley

Street, came in with a somewhat rough-looking young assistant. Mr

of most of the artists who dealt with him. As a rule, he never left his

shop. He waited for people to come to him. But he always made an

exception in favour of Dorian Gray. There was something about

Dorian that charmed everybody. It was a pleasure even to see him.

‘What can I do for you, Mr Gray?’ he said, rubbing his fat

freckled hands. ‘I thought I would do myself the honour of coming

round in person. I have just got a beauty of a frame, sir. Picked it up

at a sale. Old Florentine. Came from Fonthill,3 I believe. Admirably

suited for a religious subject, Mr Gray.’

‘I am so sorry you have given yourself the trouble of coming

round, Mr Hubbard. I shall certainly drop in and look at the frame –

though I don’t go in much at present for religious art4 – but to-day I

only want a picture carried to the top of the house for me. It is

rather heavy, so I thought I would ask you to lend me a couple of

your men.’

‘No trouble at all, Mr Gray. I am delighted to be of any service to

you. Which is the work of art, sir?’

‘This,’ replied Dorian, moving the screen back. ‘Can you move it,

covering and all, just as it is? I don’t want it to get scratched going

upstairs.’

‘There will be no diɽculty, sir,’ said the genial frame-maker,

beginning, with the aid of his assistant, to unhook the picture from

the long brass chains by which it was suspended. ‘And, now, where

shall we carry it to, Mr Gray?’

‘I will show you the way, Mr Hubbard, if you will kindly follow

me. Or perhaps you had better go in front. I am afraid it is right at

the top of the house. We will go up by the front staircase, as it is

wider.’

He held the door open for them, and they passed out into the

hall and began the ascent. The elaborate character of the frame had

made the picture extremely bulky, and now and then, in spite of the

obsequious protests of Mr Hubbard, who had the true tradesman’s

spirited dislike of seeing a gentleman doing anything useful, Dorian

put his hand to it so as to help them.

‘Something of a load to carry, sir,’ gasped the little man, when

they reached the top landing. And he wiped his shiny forehead.

‘I am afraid it is rather heavy,’5 murmured Dorian, as he

unlocked the door that opened into the room that was to keep for

him the curious secret of his life and hide his soul from the eyes of

men.

He had not entered the place for more than four years – not,

indeed, since he had used it ɹrst as a play-room when he was a

child, and then as a study when he grew somewhat older. It was a

large, well-proportioned room, which had been specially built by

the last Lord Kelso for the use of the little grandson whom, for his

strange likeness to his mother, and also for other reasons, he had

always hated and desired to keep at a distance. It appeared to

Dorian to have but little changed. There was the huge Italian

cassone, with its fantastically-painted panels and its tarnished gilt

mouldings, in which he had so often hidden himself as a boy. There

the satinwood bookcase ɹlled with his dog-eared schoolbooks. On

the wall behind it was hanging the same ragged Flemish tapestry

where a faded king and queen were playing chess in a garden, while

a company of hawkers rode by, carrying hooded birds on their

gauntleted wrists. How well he remembered it all! Every moment of

his lonely childhood came back to him as he looked round. He

recalled the stainless purity of his boyish life, and it seemed horrible

to him that it was here the fatal portrait was to be hidden away.

How little he had thought, in those dead days, of all that was in

store for him!

himself would not see it. Why should he watch the hideous

and their charm. Perhaps, some day, the cruel look would have

passed away from the scarlet sensitive mouth, and he might show to

the world Basil Hallward’s masterpiece.

No; that was impossible. Hour by hour, and week by week, the

thing upon the canvas was growing old. It might escape the

The cheeks would become hollow or ɻaccid. Yellow crow’s-feet

would creep round the fading eyes and make them horrible. The

hair would lose its brightness, the mouth would gape or droop,

would be foolish or gross, as the mouths of old men are. There

would be the wrinkled throat, the cold, blue-veined hands, the

twisted body, that he remembered in the grandfather who had been

so stern to him in his boyhood. The picture had to be concealed.

There was no help for it.

‘I am sorry I kept you so long. I was thinking of something else.’

‘Always glad to have a rest, Mr Gray,’ answered the frame-

maker, who was still gasping for breath. ‘Where shall we put it, sir?’

‘Oh, anywhere. Here: this will do. I don’t want to have it hung

up. Just lean it against the wall. Thanks.’

‘Might one look at the work of art, sir?’

Dorian started. ‘It would not interest you, Mr Hubbard,’ he said,

keeping his eye on the man. He felt ready to leap upon him and

concealed the secret of his life. ‘I sha’n’t trouble you any more now.

I am much obliged for your kindness in coming round.’

‘Not at all, not at all, Mr Gray. Ever ready to do anything for

you, sir.’ And Mr Hubbard tramped downstairs, followed by the

assistant, who glanced back at Dorian with a look of shy wonder in

his rough, uncomely face. He had never seen any one so marvellous.

When the sound of their footsteps had died away, Dorian locked

the door, and put the key in his pocket. He felt safe now. No one

would ever look upon the horrible thing. No eye but his would ever

see his shame.

On reaching the library he found that it was just after ɹve

o’clock, and that the tea had been already brought up. On a little

table of dark perfumed wood thickly incrusted with nacre, a present

from Lady Radley, his guardian’s wife, a pretty professional invalid,

who had spent the preceding winter in Cairo, was lying a note from

shred of crumpled lace.6 He sighed, and, having poured himself out

some tea, opened Lord Henry’s note. It was simply to say that he

sent him round the evening paper, and a book that might interest

him, and that he would be at the club at eight-ɹfteen. He opened

The St James’s languidly, and looked through it. A red pencil-mark

on the ɹfth page caught his eye. It drew attention to the following

paragraph: –

INQUEST ON AN ACTRESS. – An inquest was held this morning at the Bell Tavern,

Hoxton Road, by Mr Danby, the District Coroner, on the body of Sibyl Vane, a young

actress recently engaged at the Royal Theatre, Holborn. A verdict of death by misadventure

was returned. Considerable sympathy was expressed for the mother of the deceased, who

was greatly aʃected during the giving of her own evidence, and that of Dr Birrell, who had

made the post-mortem examination of the deceased.

knew more than enough English for that.

Perhaps he had read it, and had begun to suspect something.

killed her.

His eye fell on the yellow book that Lord Henry had sent him.

octagonal stand, that had always looked to him like the work of

the leaves. After a few minutes he became absorbed. It was the

strangest book that he had ever read.7 It seemed to him that in

exquisite raiment, and to the delicate sound of ɻutes, the sins of the

world were passing in dumb show before him. Things that he had

dimly dreamed of were suddenly made real to him. Things of which

he had never dreamed were gradually revealed.

It was a novel without a plot, and with only one character,

being, indeed, simply a psychological study of a certain young

Parisian, who spent his life trying to realize in the nineteenth

century all the passions and modes of thought that belonged to

French school of Symbolistes.8 There were in it metaphors as

monstrous as orchids, and as subtle in colour. The life of the senses

was described in the terms of mystical philosophy. One hardly knew

mediæval saint or the morbid confessions of a modern sinner. It was

a poisonous book. The heavy odour of incense seemed to cling about

its pages and to trouble the brain. The mere cadence of the

sentences, the subtle monotony of their music, so full as it was of

complex refrains and movements elaborately repeated, produced in

the mind of the lad, as he passed from chapter to chapter, a form of

reverie, a malady of dreaming, that made him unconscious of the

falling day and creeping shadows.

Cloudless, and pierced by one solitary star, a copper-green sky

gleamed through the windows. He read on by its wan light till he

could read no more. Then, after his valet had reminded him several

times of the lateness of the hour, he got up, and, going into the next

room, placed the book on the little Florentine table that always

stood at his bedside, and began to dress for dinner.

much bored.

‘I am so sorry, Harry,’ he cried, ‘but really it is entirely your

time was going.’

‘Yes: I thought you would like it,’ replied his host, rising from his

chair.

‘I didn’t say I liked it, Harry. I said it fascinated me. There is a

great diʃerence.’

‘Ah, you have discovered that?’ murmured Lord Henry. And they

passed into the dining-room.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER XI

For years, Dorian Gray could not free himself from the inɻuence of

this book. Or perhaps it would be more accurate to say that he

never sought to free himself from it. He procured from Paris no less

than nine large-paper copies of the ɹrst edition, and had them

bound in diʃerent colours, so that they might suit his various moods

and the changing fancies of a nature over which he seemed, at

times, to have almost entirely lost control. The hero, the wonderful

young Parisian, in whom the romantic and the scientiɹc

temperaments were so strangely blended, became to him a kind of

preɹguring type of himself. And, indeed, the whole book seemed to

him to contain the story of his own life, written before he had lived

it.

In one point he was more fortunate than the novel’s fantastic

hero. He never knew – never, indeed, had any cause to know – that

somewhat grotesque dread of mirrors, and polished metal surfaces,

and still water, which came upon the young Parisian so early in his

life, and was occasioned by the sudden decay of a beauty that had

once, apparently, been so remarkable. It was with an almost cruel

joy – and perhaps in nearly every joy, as certainly in every pleasure,

cruelty has its place – that he used to read the latter part of the

book, with its really tragic, if somewhat over-emphasized, account

of the sorrow and despair of one who had himself lost what in

others, and in the world, he had most dearly valued.

them. His mere presence seemed to recall to them the memory of

the innocence that they had tarnished. They wondered how one so

age that was at once sordid and sensual.

Often, on returning home from one of those mysterious and

prolonged absences that gave rise to such strange conjecture among

that laughed back at him from the polished glass. The very

sharpness of the contrast used to quicken his sense of pleasure. He

grew more and more enamoured of his own beauty, more and more

interested in the corruption of his own soul. He would examine with

minute care, and sometimes with a monstrous and terrible delight,

the hideous lines that seared the wrinkling forehead or crawled

and smile. He mocked the misshapen body and the failing limbs.

There were moments, indeed, at night, when, lying sleepless in

little ill-famed tavern near the Docks, which, under an assumed

of the ruin he had brought upon his soul, with a pity that was all the

seemed to increase with gratiɹcation. The more he knew, the more

as he fed them.

Yet he was not really reckless, at any rate in his relations to

Wednesday evening while the season lasted, he would throw open

to the world his beautiful house and have the most celebrated

art. His little dinners, in the settling of which Lord Henry always

assisted him, were noted as much for the careful selection and

decoration of the table, with its subtle symphonic arrangements of

exotic ɻowers, and embroidered cloths, and antique plate of gold

themselves perfect by the worship of beauty’.1 Like Gautier, he was

one for whom ‘the visible world existed’.

And, certainly, to him Life itself was the ɹrst, the greatest, of the

arts, and for it all the other arts seemed to be but a preparation.

Fashion, by which what is really fantastic becomes for a moment

universal, and Dandyism,2 which, in its own way, is an attempt to

assert the absolute modernity of beauty, had, of course, their

fascination for him. His mode of dressing, and the particular styles

that from time to time he aʃected, had their marked inɻuence on

the young exquisites of the Mayfair balls and Pall Mall club

windows, who copied him in everything that he did, and tried to

reproduce the accidental charm of his graceful, though to him only

half-serious, fopperies.

For, while he was but too ready to accept the position that was

almost immediately oʃered to him on his coming of age, and found,

indeed, a subtle pleasure in the thought that he might really become

to the London of his own day what to imperial Neronian Rome the

author of the ‘Satyricon’3 once had been, yet in his inmost heart he

realization.

The worship of the senses has often, and with much justice, been

decried, men feeling a natural instinct of terror about passions and

conscious of sharing with the less highly organized forms of

upon man moving through History, he was haunted by a feeling of

loss. So much had been surrendered! and to such little purpose!

There had been mad wilful rejections, monstrous forms of self-

a degradation inɹnitely more terrible than that fancied degradation

from which, in their ignorance, they had sought to escape, Nature,

in her wonderful irony, driving out the anchorite to feed with the

wild animals of the desert and giving to the hermit the beasts of the

ɹeld as his companions.

revival. It was to have its service of the intellect, certainly; yet, it

life that is itself but a moment.

There are few of us who have not sometimes wakened before

terrible than reality itself, and instinct with that vivid life that lurks

in all grotesques, and that lends to Gothic art its enduring vitality,

minds have been troubled with the malady of reverie. Gradually

white ɹngers creep through the curtains, and they appear to

corners of the room, and crouch there. Outside, there is the stirring

work, or the sigh and sob of the wind coming down from the hills,

and wandering round the silent house, as though it feared to wake

the sleepers, and yet must needs call forth sleep from her purple

cave. Veil after veil of thin dusky gauze is lifted, and by degrees the

been refashioned anew in the darkness for our pleasure, a world in

or have other secrets, a world in which the past would have little or

no place, or survive, at any rate, in no conscious form of obligation

or regret, the remembrance even of joy having its bitterness, and the

memories of pleasure their pain.

It was the creation of such worlds as these that seemed to Dorian

Gray to be the true object, or amongst the true objects, of life; and

in his search for sensations that would be at once new and

delightful, and possess that element of strangeness that is so

essential to romance,4 he would often adopt certain modes of

thought that he knew to be really alien to his nature, abandon

himself to their subtle inɻuences, and then, having, as it were,

modern psychologists, is often a condition of it.

It was rumoured of him once that he was about to join the

Roman Catholic communion; and certainly the Roman ritual had

human tragedy that it sought to symbolize. He loved to kneel down

veil of the tabernacle, or raising aloft the jewelled lantern-shaped

think, is indeed the ‘panis cælestis’, the bread of angels, or, robed in

chalice, and smiting his breast for his sins. The fuming censers, that

the grave boys, in their lace and scarlet, tossed into the air like great

he used to look with wonder at the black confessionals, and long to

sit in the dim shadow of one of them and listen to men and women

whispering through the worn grating the true story of their lives.

But he never fell into the error of arresting his intellectual

development by any formal acceptance of creed or system, or of

subtle antinomianism5 that always seems to accompany it, moved

him for a season; and for a season he inclined to the materialistic

doctrines of the Darwinismus movement in Germany,6 and found a

curious pleasure in tracing the thoughts and passions of men to

some pearly cell in the brain, or some white nerve in the body,

delighting in the conception of the absolute dependence of the spirit

on certain physical conditions, morbid or healthy, normal or

diseased. Yet, as has been said of him before, no theory of life

seemed to him to be of any importance compared with life itself. He

felt keenly conscious of how barren all intellectual speculation is

when separated from action and experiment. He knew that the

senses, no less than the soul, have their spiritual mysteries to reveal.

And so he would now study perfumes,7 and the secrets of their

manufacture, distilling heavily-scented oils, and burning odorous

gums from the East. He saw that there was no mood of the mind

that had not its counterpart in the sensuous life, and set himself to

discover their true relations, wondering what there was in

frankincense that made one mystical, and in ambergris that stirred

one’s passions, and in violets that woke the memory of dead

romances, and in musk that troubled the brain, and in champak that

stained the imagination; and seeking often to elaborate a real

to expel melancholy from the soul.

At another time he devoted himself entirely to music, and in a

grinning negroes beat monotonously upon copper drums, and,

hooded snakes and horrible horned adders. The harsh intervals and

shrill discords of barbaric music stirred him at times when

Schubert’s grace, and Chopin’s beautiful sorrows, and the mighty

harmonies of Beethoven himself, fell unheeded on his ear. He

collected together from all parts of the world the strangest

instruments that could be found, either in the tombs of dead nations

or among the few savage tribes that have survived contact with

mysterious juruparis of the Rio Negro Indians, that women are not

been subjected to fasting and scourging, and the earthen jars of the

Peruvians that have the shrill cries of birds, and ɻutes of human

bones such as Alfonso de Ovalle heard in Chili, and the sonorous

serpents, like the one that Bernal Diaz saw when he went with

thought that Art, like Nature, has her monsters, things of bestial

Lord Henry, listening in rapt pleasure to ‘Tannhãuser’, and seeing in

the prelude to that great work of art a presentation of the tragedy of

his own soul.8

On one occasion he took up the study of jewels, and appeared at

a costume ball as Anne de Joyeuse, Admiral of France, in a dress

covered with ɹve hundred and sixty pearls. This taste enthralled

would often spend a whole day settling and resettling in their cases

of colour, and had a turquoise de la vieille roche that was the envy of

all the connoisseurs.

He discovered wonderful stories, also, about jewels. In

the exhibition of golden letters and a scarlet robe’ the monster could

be thrown into a magical sleep, and slain. According to the great

alchemist, Pierre de Boniface, the diamond rendered a man

appeased anger, and the hyacinth pro-voked sleep, and the amethyst

hydropicus deprived the moon of her colour. The selenite waxed

and waned with the moon, and the meloceus, that discovers thieves,

could be aʃected only by the blood of kids. Leonardus Camillus had

according to Democritus, kept the wearer from any danger by ɹre.

The King of Ceilan rode through his city with a large ruby in his

the gable were ‘two golden apples, in which were two carbuncles’,

of the world, inchased out of silver, looking through fair mirrours of

in the mouths of the dead. A sea-monster had been enamoured of

the pearl that the diver brought to King Perozes, and had slain the

thief, and mourned for seven moons over its loss. When the Huns

the story – nor was it ever found again, though the Emperor

Anastasius oʃered ɹve hundred-weight of gold pieces for it. The

hundred and four pearls, one for every god that he worshipped.

and had a hawk-glove sewn with twelve rubies and ɹfty-two great

orients. The ducal hat of Charles the Rash, the last Duke of

Burgundy of his race, was hung with pear-shaped pearls, and

studded with sapphires.

How exquisite life had once been! How gorgeous in its pomp and

decoration! Even to read of the luxury of the dead was wonderful.9

Then he turned his attention to embroideries, and to the

tapestries that performed the oɽce of frescoes in the chill rooms of

the Northern nations of Europe. As he investigated the subject – and

he always had an extraordinary faculty of becoming absolutely

absorbed for the moment in whatever he took up – he was almost

saddened by the reɻection of the ruin that Time brought on

Summer followed summer, and the yellow jonquils bloomed and

velarium that Nero had stretched across the Colosseum at Rome,

longed to see the curious table-napkins wrought for the Priest of the

be wanted for a feast; the mortuary cloth of King Chilperic, with its

three hundred golden bees; the fantastic robes that excited the

indignation of the Bishop of Pontus, and were ɹgured with ‘lions,

panthers, bears, dogs, forests, rocks, hunters – all, in fact, that a

painter can copy from nature’; and the coat that Charles of Orleans

once wore, on the sleeves of which were embroidered the verses of a

song beginning ‘Madame, 
je 
suis 
tout 
joyeux’, the musical

accompaniment of the words being wrought in gold thread, and

each note, of square shape in those days, formed with four pearls.

He read of the room that was prepared at the palace of Rheims for

the use of Queen Joan of Burgundy, and was decorated with

‘thirteen hundred and twenty-one parrots, made in broidery, and

a mourning-bed made for her of black velvet powdered with

It had been taken from the Turkish camp before Vienna, and the

canopy.

And so, for a whole year, he sought to accumulate the most

exquisite specimens that he could ɹnd of textile and embroidered

thread palmates, and stitched over with iridescent beetles’ wings;

East as ‘woven air’, and ‘running water’, and ‘evening dew’; strange

bound in tawny satins or fair blue silks, and wrought with ɻeurs de

lys, birds, and images; veils of lacis worked in Hungary point;

Sicilian brocades, and stiʃ Spanish velvets; Georgian work with its

their marvellously-plumaged birds.

house he had stored away many rare and beautiful specimens of

purple and jewels and ɹne linen that she may hide the pallid

macerated body that is worn by the suʃering that she seeks for, and

wounded by self-inɻicted pain. He possessed a gorgeous cope of

crimson silk and gold-thread damask, ɹgured with a repeating

seed-pearls. The orphreys were divided into panels representing

scenes from the life of the Virgin, and the coronation of the Virgin

was ɹgured in coloured silks upon the hood. This was Italian work

of the ɹfteenth century. Another cope was of green velvet,

embroidered with heart-shaped groups of acanthus-leaves, from

which spread long-stemmed white blossoms, the details of which

were picked out with silver thread and coloured crystals. The morse

woven in a diaper of red and gold silk, and were starred with

medallions of many saints and martyrs, among whom was St

Sebastian. He had chasubles, also, of amber-coloured silk, and blue

silk and gold brocade, and yellow silk damask and cloth of gold,

ɹgured with representations of the Passion and Cruciɹxion of Christ,

and embroidered with lions and peacocks and other emblems;

that quickened his imagination.

For these treasures, and everything that he collected in his lovely

could escape, for a season, from the fear that seemed to him at times

locked room where he had spent so much of his boyhood, he had

features showed him the real degradation of his life, and in front of

it had draped the purple-and-gold pall as a curtain. For weeks he

back his light heart, his wonderful joyousness, his passionate

creep out of the house, go down to dreadful places near Blue Gate

Fields,10 and stay there, day after day, until he was driven away. On

his return he would sit in front of the picture, sometimes loathing it

and himself, but ɹlled, at other times, with that pride of

individualism that is half the fascination of sin, and smiling, with

secret pleasure, at the misshapen shadow that had to bear the

burden that should have been his own.

door.

He was quite conscious that this would tell them nothing. It was

shame it looked? Even if he told them, would they believe it?

Yet he was afraid. Sometimes when he was down at his great

county by the wanton luxury and gorgeous splendour of his mode of

life, he would suddenly leave his guests and rush back to town to

was still there. What if it should be stolen? The mere thought made

Perhaps the world already suspected it.

For, while he fascinated many, there were not a few who

distrusted him. He was very nearly blackballed at a West End club

knew the mysteries of their trade. His extraordinary absences

sneer, or look at him with cold searching eyes, as though they were

determined to discover his secret.

Of such insolences and attempted slights he, of course, took no

notice, and in the opinion of most people his frank debonair

manner, his charming boyish smile, and the inɹnite grace of that

wonderful youth that seemed never to leave him, were in

themselves a suɽcient answer to the calumnies, for so they termed

them, that were circulated about him. It was remarked, however,

that some of those who had been most intimate with him appeared,

for his sake had braved all social censure and set convention at

deɹance, were seen to grow pallid with shame or horror if Dorian

Gray entered the room.

importance than morals, and, in its opinion, the highest

chef. And, after all, it is a very poor consolation to be told that the

man who has given one a bad dinner, or poor wine, is

the same as the canons of art. Form is absolutely essential to it. It

should combine the insincere character of a romantic play with the

wit and beauty that make such plays delightful to us. Is insincerity

such a terrible thing? I think not.11 It is merely a method by which

we can multiply our personalities.

Such, at any rate, was Dorian Gray’s opinion. He used to wonder

at the shallow psychology of those who conceive the Ego in man as

a thing simple, permanent, reliable, and of one essence. To him,

man was a being with myriad lives and myriad sensations, a

complex multiform creature that bore within itself strange legacies

of thought and passion, and whose very ɻesh was tainted with the

monstrous maladies of the dead. He loved to stroll through the

various portraits of those whose blood ɻowed in his veins.12 Here

was Philip Herbert, described by Francis Osborne, in his ‘Memoires

on the Reigns of Queen Elizabeth and King James’, as one who was

‘caressed by the Court for his handsome face, which kept him not

long company’. Was it young Herbert’s life that he sometimes led?

Had some strange poisonous germ crept from body to body till it

had reached his own? Was it some dim sense of that ruined grace

that had made him so suddenly, and almost without cause, give

utterance, in Basil Hallward’s studio, to the mad prayer that had so

changed his life? Here, in gold-embroidered red doublet, jewelled

surcoat, and gilt-edged ruʃ and wrist-bands, stood Sir Anthony

Sherard, with his silver-and-black armour piled at his feet. What had

this man’s legacy been? Had the lover of Giovanna of Naples

bequeathed him some inheritance of sin and shame? Were his own

actions merely the dreams that the dead man had not dared to

realize? Here, from the fading canvas, smiled Lady Elizabeth

Devereux, in her gauze hood, pearl stomacher, and pink slashed

sleeves. A ɻower was in her right hand, and her left clasped an

enamelled collar of white and damask roses. On a table by her side

lay a mandolin and an apple. There were large green rosettes upon

her little pointed shoes. He knew her life, and the strange stories

that were told about her lovers. Had he something of her

temperament in him? These oval heavy-lidded eyes seemed to look

curiously at him. What of George Willoughby, with his powdered

hair and fantastic patches? How evil he looked! The face was

marriage with Mrs Fitzherbert?13 How proud and handsome he was,

with his chestnut curls and insolent pose! What passions had he

bequeathed? The world had looked upon him as infamous. He had

led the orgies at Carlton House. The Star of the Garter glittered

upon his breast. Beside him hung the portrait of his wife, a pallid,

How curious it all seemed! And his mother with her Lady Hamilton

face, and her moist wine-dashed lips – he knew what he had got

from her. He had got from her his beauty, and his passion for the

beauty of others. She laughed at him in her loose Bacchante dress.

There were vine leaves in her hair. The purple spilled from the cup

she was holding. The carnations of the painting had withered, but

the eyes were still wonderful in their depth and brilliancy of colour.

They seemed to follow him wherever he went.

Yet one had ancestors in literature, as well as in one’s own race,

nearer perhaps in type and temperament, many of them, and

certainly with an inɻuence of which one was more absolutely

conscious. There were times when it appeared to Dorian Gray that

the whole of history was merely the record of his own life, not as he

had lived it in act and circumstance, but as his imagination had

created it for him, as it had been in his brain and in his passions. He

way their lives had been his own.

The hero of the wonderful novel14 that had so inɻuenced his life

had himself known this curious fancy. In the seventh chapter he

tells how, crowned with laurel, lest lightning might strike him, he

had sat, as Tiberius, in a garden at Capri, reading the shameful

books of Elephantis, while dwarfs and peacocks strutted round him

and the ɻute-player mocked the swinger of the censer; and, as

Caligula, had caroused with the green-shirted jockeys in their

stables, and supped in an ivory manger with a jewel-frontleted

horse; and, as Domitian,15 had wandered through a corridor lined

with marble mirrors, looking round with haggard eyes for the

reɻection of the dagger that was to end his days, and sick with that

ennui, that terrible tædium vitæ, that comes on those to whom life

denies nothing; and had peered through a clear emerald at the red

shambles of the Circus, and then, in a litter of pearl and purple

drawn by silver-shod mules, been carried through the Street of

Pomegranates to a House of Gold, and heard men cry on Nero Cæsar

as he passed by; and, as Elagabalus, had painted his face with

colours, and plied the distaʃ among the women, and brought the

Moon from Carthage, and given her in mystic marriage to the Sun.

awful and beautiful forms of those whom Vice and Blood and

Gian Maria Visconti, who used hounds to chase living men, and

whose murdered body was covered with roses by a harlot who had

loved him; the Borgia on his white horse, with Fratricide riding

Riario, the young Cardinal Archbishop of Florence, child and minion

of Sixtus IV, whose beauty was equalled only by his debauchery,

and who received Leonora of Aragon in a pavilion of white and

crimson silk, ɹlled with nymphs and centaurs, and gilded a boy that

he might serve at the feast as Ganymede or Hylas; Ezzelin, whose

melancholy could be cured only by the spectacle of death, and who

had a passion for red blood, as other men have for red wine – the

son of the Fiend, as was reported, and one who had cheated his

father at dice when gambling with him for his own soul;

Giambattista Cibo, who in mockery took the name of Innocent, and

into whose torpid veins the blood of three lads was infused by a

Jewish doctor; Sigismondo Malatesta, the lover of Isotta, and the

him, blessed him.

There was a horrible fascination in them all. He saw them at

night, and they troubled his imagination in the day. The

been poisoned by a book.16 There were moments when he looked on

evil simply as a mode through which he could realize his conception

of the beautiful.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER XII

It was on the ninth of November, the eve of his own thirty-eighth

birthday,1 as he often remembered afterwards.

He was walking home about eleven o’clock from Lord Henry’s,

where he had been dining, and was wrapped in heavy furs, as the

South Audley Street a man passed him in the mist, walking very

fast, and with the collar of his grey ulster turned up. He had a bag

sense of fear, for which he could not account, came over him. He

of his own house.

But Hallward had seen him. Dorian heard him ɹrst stopping on

the pavement and then hurrying after him. In a few moments his

hand was on his arm.

‘Dorian! What an extraordinary piece of luck! I have been

waiting for you in your library ever since nine o’clock. Finally I took

pity on your tired servant, and told him to go to bed, as he let me

out. I am oʃ to Paris by the midnight train, and I particularly

wanted to see you before I left. I thought it was you, or rather your

fur coat, as you passed me. But I wasn’t quite sure. Didn’t you

recognize me?’

‘In this fog, my dear Basil? Why, I can’t even recognize

Grosvenor Square. I believe my house is somewhere about here, but

I don’t feel at all certain about it. I am sorry you are going away, as

I have not seen you for ages. But I suppose you will be back soon?’

take a studio in Paris, and shut myself up till I have ɹnished a great

have something to say to you.’

‘I shall be charmed. But won’t you miss your train?’ said Dorian

his latch-key.

The lamp-light struggled out through the fog, and Hallward

looked at his watch. ‘I have heaps of time,’ he answered. ‘The train

doesn’t go till twelve-ɹfteen, and it is only just eleven. In fact, I was

sha’n’t have any delay about luggage, as I have sent on my heavy

Victoria2 in twenty minutes.’

Dorian looked at him and smiled. ‘What a way for a fashionable

painter to travel! A Gladstone bag, and an ulster! Come in, or the

fog will get into the house. And mind you don’t talk about anything

serious. Nothing is serious nowadays. At least nothing should be.’

Hallward shook his head, as he entered, and followed Dorian

into the library. There was a bright wood ɹre blazing in the large

open hearth. The lamps were lit, and an open Dutch silver spirit-

tumblers, on a little marqueterie table.

‘You see your servant made me quite at home, Dorian. He gave

Frenchman you used to have. What has become of the Frenchman,

by the bye?’

Dorian shrugged his shoulders. ‘I believe he married Lady

dressmaker. Anglomanie is very fashionable over there now, I hear.

It seems silly of the French, doesn’t it? But – do you know? – he was

not at all a bad servant. I never liked him, but I had nothing to

was really very devoted to me, and seemed quite sorry when he

went away. Have another brandy-and-soda? Or would you like

sure to be some in the next room.’

‘Thanks, I won’t have anything more,’ said the painter, taking his

cap and coat oʃ, and throwing them on the bag that he had placed

in the corner. ‘And now, my dear fellow, I want to speak to you

seriously. Don’t frown like that. You make it so much more diɽcult

for me.’

‘What is it all about?’ cried Dorian, in his petulant way, ɻinging

himself down on the sofa. ‘I hope it is not about myself. I am tired

of myself to-night. I should like to be somebody else.’

voice, ‘and I must say it to you. I shall only keep you half an hour.’

Dorian sighed, and lit a cigarette. ‘Half an hour!’ he murmured.

‘It is not much to ask of you, Dorian, and it is entirely for your

own sake that I am speaking. I think it right that you should know

that the most dreadful things are being said against you in London.’3

‘I don’t wish to know anything about them. I love scandals about

other people, but scandals about myself don’t interest me. They

have not got the charm of novelty.’

‘They must interest you, Dorian. Every gentleman is interested in

his good name. You don’t want people to talk of you as something

vile and degraded. Of course you have your position, and your

wealth, and all that kind of thing. But position and wealth are not

everything. Mind you, I don’t believe these rumours at all. At least, I

can’t believe them when I see you. Sin is a thing that writes itself

across a man’s face. It cannot be concealed. People talk sometimes

of secret vices. There are no such things. If a wretched man has a

vice, it shows itself in the lines of his mouth, the droop of his

eyelids, the moulding of his hands even. Somebody – I won’t

mention his name, but you know him – came to me last year to have

his portrait done. I had never seen him before, and had never heard

anything about him at the time, though I have heard a good deal

since. He oʃered an extravagant price. I refused him. There was

something in the shape of his ɹngers that I hated.4 I know now that

I was quite right in what I fancied about him. His life is dreadful.

theirs? You used to be a friend of Lord Staveley. I met him at dinner

last week. Your name happened to come up in conversation, in

the Dudley. Staveley curled his lip, and said that you might have the

girl should be allowed to know, and whom no chaste woman should

out before everybody. It was horrible! Why is your friendship so

fatal to young men?5 There was that wretched boy in the Guards

who committed suicide. You were his great friend. There was Sir

Henry Ashton, who had to leave England, with a tarnished name.

You and he were inseparable. What about Adrian Singleton, and his

dreadful end? What about Lord Kent’s only son, and his career? I

met his father yesterday in St James’s Street. He seemed broken

with shame and sorrow. What about the young Duke of Perth? What

sort of life has he got now? What gentleman would associate with

him?’

name across a bill, am I his keeper?6 I know how people chatter in

England. The middle classes air their moral prejudices over their

gross dinner-tables, and whisper about what they call the

proɻigacies of their betters in order to try and pretend that they are

in smart society, and on intimate terms with the people they

slander. In this country it is enough for a man to have distinction

and brains for every common tongue to wag against him. And what

sort of lives do these people, who pose as being moral, lead

themselves? My dear fellow, you forget that we are in the native

land of the hypocrite.’

‘Dorian,’ cried Hallward, ‘that is not the question. England is bad

enough I know, and English society is all wrong. That is the reason

why I want you to be ɹne. You have not been ɹne. One has a right

to judge of a man by the eʃect he has over his friends. Yours seem

to lose all sense of honour, of goodness, of purity. You have ɹlled

them with a madness for pleasure. They have gone down into the

depths. You led them there. Yes: you led them there, and yet you

none other, you should not have made his sister’s name a by-word.’

‘Take care, Basil. You go too far.’

‘I must speak, and you must listen. You shall listen. When you

Is there a single decent woman in London now who would drive

seen creeping at dawn out of dreadful houses and slinking in

is led there?7 Dorian, you don’t know what is said about you. I

saying once that every man who turned himself into an amateur

curate for the moment always began by saying that, and then

proceeded to break his word. I do want to preach to you. I want you

to lead such a life as will make the world respect you. I want you to

have a clean name for a fair record. I want you to get rid of the

dreadful people you associate with. Don’t shrug your shoulders like

that. Don’t be so indiʃerent. You have a wonderful inɻuence. Let it

be for good, not for evil. They say that you corrupt every one with

whom you become intimate, and that it is quite suɽcient for you to

enter a house, for shame of some kind to follow after. I don’t know

that, I should have to see your soul.’

‘To see my soul!’ muttered Dorian Gray, starting up from the sofa

and turning almost white from fear.

‘Yes,’ answered Hallward, gravely, and with deep-toned sorrow

in his voice – ‘to see your soul. But only God can do that.’

A bitter laugh of mockery broke from the lips of the younger

man. ‘You shall see it yourself, to-night!’ he cried, seizing a lamp

look at it? You can tell the world all about it afterwards, if you

choose. Nobody would believe you. If they did believe you, they

would like me all the better for it. I know the age better than you

do, though you will prate about it so tediously. Come, I tell you.

You have chattered enough about corruption. Now you shall look on

it face to face.’

There was the madness of pride in every word he uttered. He

stamped his foot upon the ground in his boyish insolent manner. He

felt a terrible joy at the thought that some one else was to share his

with the hideous memory of what he had done.

‘Yes,’ he continued, coming closer to him, and looking

see the thing that you fancy only God can see.’

Hallward started back. ‘This is blasphemy, Dorian!’ he cried.

‘You must not say things like that. They are horrible, and they don’t

mean anything.’

‘You think so?’ He laughed again.

‘I know so. As for what I said to you to-night, I said it for your

good. You know I have been always a staunch friend to you.’8

A twisted ɻash of pain shot across the painter’s face. He paused

for a moment, and a wild feeling of pity came over him. After all,

what right had he to pry into the life of Dorian Gray? If he had done

a tithe of what was rumoured about him, how much he must have

suʃered! Then he straightened himself up, and walked over to the

ɹreplace, and stood there, looking at the burning logs with their

frost-like ashes and their throbbing cores of ɻame.

‘I am waiting, Basil,’ said the young man, in a hard, clear voice.

He turned round. ‘What I have to say is this,’ he cried. ‘You must

give me some answer to these horrible charges that are made

against you. If you tell me that they are absolutely untrue from

beginning to end, I shall believe you. Deny them, Dorian, deny

me that you are bad, and corrupt, and shameful.’9

Dorian Gray smiled. There was a curl of contempt in his lips.

‘Come upstairs, Basil,’ he said, quietly. ‘I keep a diary of my life

from day to day, and it never leaves the room in which it is written.

I shall show it to you if you come with me.’

‘I shall come with you, Dorian, if you wish it. I see I have missed

my train. That makes no matter. I can go to-morrow. But don’t ask

me to read anything to-night. All I want is a plain answer to my

question.’

‘That shall be given to you upstairs. I could not give it here. You

will not have to read long.’

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER XIII

He passed out of the room, and began the ascent, Basil Hallward

following close behind. They walked softly, as men do instinctively

at night. The lamp cast fantastic shadows on the wall and staircase.

A rising wind made some of the windows rattle.

When they reached the top landing, Dorian set the lamp down

on the ɻoor, and taking out the key turned it in the lock. ‘You insist

on knowing, Basil?’ he asked, in a low voice.

‘Yes.’

‘I am delighted,’ he answered, smiling. Then he added,

somewhat harshly, ‘You are the one man in the world who is

entitled to know everything about me. You have had more to do

with my life than you think:’ and, taking up the lamp, he opened the

door and went in. A cold current of air passed them, and the light

shot up for a moment in a ɻame of murky orange. He shuddered.

‘Shut the door behind you,’ he whispered, as he placed the lamp on

the table.

Hallward glanced round him, with a puzzled expression. The

room looked as if it had not been lived in for years. A faded Flemish

tapestry, a curtained picture, an old Italian cassone, and an almost

empty bookcase – that was all that it seemed to contain, besides a

chair and a table. As Dorian Gray was lighting a half-burned candle

that was standing on the mantelshelf, he saw that the whole place

was covered with dust, and that the carpet was in holes. A mouse

mildew.

that curtain back, and you will see mine.’

The voice that spoke was cold and cruel. ‘You are mad, Dorian,

or playing a part,’ muttered Hallward, frowning.

‘You won’t? Then I must do it myself,’ said the young man; and

he tore the curtain from its rod, and ɻung it on the ground.

An exclamation of horror broke from the painter’s lips as he saw

in the dim light the hideous face on the canvas grinning at him.

There was something in its expression that ɹlled him with disgust

and loathing. Good heavens! it was Dorian Gray’s own face that he

was looking at! The horror, whatever it was, had not yet entirely

spoiled that marvellous beauty. There was still some gold in the

thinning hair and some scarlet on the sensual mouth. The sodden

curves had not yet completely passed away from chiselled nostrils

and from plastic throat. Yes, it was Dorian himself. But who had

done it? He seemed to recognize his own brush-work, and the frame

was his own design. The idea was monstrous, yet he felt afraid. He

seized the lighted candle, and held it to the picture. In the left-hand

corner was his own name, traced in long letters of bright vermilion.

It was some foul parody, some infamous, ignoble satire. He had

never done that. Still, it was his own picture. He knew it, and he felt

as if his blood had changed in a moment from ɹre to sluggish ice.

sweat.

The young man was leaning against the mantelshelf, watching

passion of the spectator, with perhaps a ɻicker of triumph in his

pretending to do so.

‘What does this mean?’ cried Hallward, at last. His own voice

sounded shrill and curious in his ears.

‘Years ago, when I was a boy,’ said Dorian Gray, crushing the

ɻower in his hand, ‘you met me, ɻattered me,1 and taught me to be

vain of my good looks. One day you introduced me to a friend of

yours, who explained to me the wonder of youth, and you ɹnished a

portrait of me that revealed to me the wonder of beauty. In a mad

moment, that, even now, I don’t know whether I regret or not, I

made a wish, perhaps you would call it a prayer…’

‘I remember it! Oh, how well I remember it! No! the thing is

impossible. The room is damp. Mildew has got into the canvas. The

paints I used had some wretched mineral poison in them. I tell you

the thing is impossible.’

stained glass.

‘You told me you had destroyed it.’

‘I was wrong. It has destroyed me.’

‘I don’t believe it is my picture.’

‘Can’t you see your ideal in it?’ said Dorian, bitterly.

‘My ideal, as you call it…’

‘As you called it.’

‘There was nothing evil in it, nothing shameful. You were to me

such an ideal as I shall never meet again. This is the face of a

satyr.’2

‘It is the face of my soul.’

‘Christ! what a thing I must have worshipped! It has the eyes of a

devil.’

‘Each of us has Heaven and Hell in him, Basil,’ cried Dorian, with

a wild gesture of despair.

Hallward turned again to the portrait, and gazed at it. ‘My God!

if it is true,’ he exclaimed, ‘and this is what you have done with

your life, why, you must be worse even than those who talk against

you fancy you to be!’ He held the light up again to the canvas, and

examined it. The surface seemed to be quite undisturbed, and as he

had left it. It was from within, apparently, that the foulness and

horror had come. Through some strange quickening of inner life the

corpse in a watery grave was not so fearful.

table and buried his face in his hands.

‘Good God, Dorian, what a lesson! what an awful lesson!’ There

was no answer, but he could hear the young man sobbing at the

I am punished for it. You worshipped yourself too much. We are

both punished.’

Dorian Gray turned slowly around, and looked at him with tear-

dimmed eyes. ‘It is too late, Basil,’ he faltered.

‘It is never too late, Dorian. Let us kneel down and try if we

cannot remember a prayer. Isn’t there a verse somewhere, ‘‘Though

your sins be as scarlet, yet I will make them as white as snow’’?’

‘Those words mean nothing to me now.’

‘Hush! don’t say that. You have done enough evil in your life. My

God! don’t you see that accursed thing leering at us?’

Dorian Gray glanced at the picture, and suddenly an

uncontrollable feeling of hatred for Basil Hallward came over him,

stirred in his chair as if he was going to rise. He rushed at him, and

man’s head down on the table, and stabbing again and again.

There was a stiɻed groan, and the horrible sound of some one

choking with blood. Three times the outstretched arms shot up

convulsively, waving grotesque stiʃ-ɹngered hands in the air. He

stabbed him twice more, but the man did not move. Something

the head down. Then he threw the knife on the table, and listened.

He could hear nothing, but the drip, drip on the threadbare

bending over the balustrade, and peering down into the black

seething well of darkness. Then he took out the key and returned to

the room, locking himself in as he did so.

that the man was simply asleep.

How quickly it had all been done! He felt strangely calm, and,

looked down, and saw the policeman going his rounds and ɻashing

crimson spot of a prowling hansom gleamed at the corner, and then

vanished. A woman in a ɻuttering shawl was creeping slowly by the

railings, staggering as she went. Now and then she stopped, and

peered back. Once, she began to sing in a hoarse voice. The

policeman strolled over and said something to her. She stumbled

the window behind him.

Having reached the door, he turned the key, and opened it. He

did not even glance at the murdered man. He felt that the secret of

painted the fatal portrait to which all his misery had been due, had

gone out of his life. That was enough.

wax image.

Having locked the door behind him, he crept quietly downstairs.

The woodwork creaked, and seemed to cry out as if in pain. He

merely the sound of his own footsteps.

When he reached the library, he saw the bag and coat in the

curious disguises, and put them into it. He could easily burn them

afterwards. Then he pulled out his watch. It was twenty minutes to

two.

He sat down, and began to think. Every year – every month,

almost – men were strangled in England for what he had done.

There had been a madness of murder in the air. Some red star had

come too close to the earth…. And yet what evidence was there

against him? Basil Hallward had left the house at eleven. No one

had seen him come in again. Most of the servants were at Selby

Royal. His valet had gone to bed…. Paris! Yes. It was to Paris that

his curious reserved habits, it would be months before any

suspicions would be aroused. Months! Everything could be

destroyed long before then.

A sudden thought struck him. He put on his fur coat and hat, and

ɻash of the bull’s-eye3 reɻected in the window. He waited, and held

his breath.

After a few moments he drew back the latch, and slipped out,

shutting the door very gently behind him. Then he began ringing

the bell. In about ɹve minutes his valet appeared, half dressed, and

looking very drowsy.

‘I am sorry to have had to wake you up, Francis,’ he said,

stepping in; ‘but I had forgotten my latch-key. What time is it?’

‘Ten minutes past two, sir,’ answered the man, looking at the

clock and blinking.

‘Ten minutes past two? How horribly late! You must wake me at

nine to-morrow. I have some work to do.’

‘All right, sir.’

‘Did any one call this evening?’

‘Mr Hallward, sir. He stayed here till eleven, and then he went

away to catch his train.’

‘Oh! I am sorry I didn’t see him. Did he leave any message?’

not ɹnd you at the club.’

‘That will do, Francis. Don’t forget to call me at nine to-morrow.’

‘No, sir.’

The man shambled down the passage in his slippers.

Dorian Gray threw his hat and coat upon the table, and passed

into the library. For a quarter of an hour he walked up and down

the room biting his lip, and thinking. Then he took down the Blue

Book4 from one of the shelves and began to turn over the leaves.

‘Alan Campbell, 152, Hertford Street, Mayfair.’ Yes; that was the

man he wanted.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER XIV

At nine o’clock the next morning his servant came in with a cup

of chocolate on a tray, and opened the shutters. Dorian was sleeping

quite peacefully, lying on his right side, with one hand underneath

his cheek. He looked like a boy who had been tired out with play, or

study.

The man had to touch him twice on the shoulder before he

woke, and as he opened his eyes a faint smile passed across his lips,

as though he had been lost in some delightful dream. Yet he had not

dreamed at all. His night had been untroubled by any images of

pleasure or of pain. But youth smiles without any reason. It is one of

its chiefest charms.

He turned round, and, leaning upon his elbow, began to sip his

chocolate. The mellow November sun came streaming into the

room. The sky was bright, and there was a genial warmth in the air.

It was almost like a morning in May.

Gradually the events of the preceding night crept with silent

bloodstained feet into his brain, and reconstructed themselves there

with terrible distinctness. He winced at the memory of all that he

had suʃered, and for a moment the same curious feeling of loathing

for Basil Hallward, that had made him kill him as he sat in the

chair, came back to him, and he grew cold with passion. The dead

man was still sitting there, too, and in the sunlight now. How

the day.

He felt that if he brooded on what he had gone through he

would sicken or grow mad. There were sins whose fascination was

intellect a quickened sense of joy, greater than any joy they brought,

or could ever bring, to the senses. But this was not one of them. It

was a thing to be driven out of the mind, to be drugged with

poppies, to be strangled lest it might strangle one itself.

When the half-hour struck, he passed his hand across his

forehead, and then got up hastily, and dressed himself with even

than once. He spent a long time also over breakfast, tasting the

various dishes, talking to his valet about some new liveries that he

through his correspondence. At some of the letters he smiled. Three

woman’s memory!’ as Lord Henry had once said.

After he had drunk his cup of black coʃee, he wiped his lips

slowly with a napkin, motioned to his servant to wait, and going

over to the table sat down and wrote two letters. One he put in his

pocket, the other he handed to the valet.

Campbell is out of town, get his address.’

upon a piece of paper, drawing ɹrst ɻowers, and bits of

architecture, and then human faces. Suddenly he remarked that

every face that he drew seemed to have a fantastic likeness to Basil

Hallward.1 He frowned, and, getting up, went over to the bookcase

and took out a volume at hazard. He was determined that he would

not think about what had happened until it became absolutely

necessary that he should do so.

When he had stretched himself on the sofa, he looked at the title-

page of the book. It was Gautier’s ‘Émaux et Camées’, Charpen-tier’s

Japanese-paper edition, with the Jacquemart etching. The binding

was of citron-green leather, with a design of gilt trellis-work and

dotted pomegranates. It had been given to him by Adrian Singleton.

As he turned over the pages his eye fell on the poem about the hand

of Lacenaire, the cold yellow hand ‘du supplice encore mal lavée’,

with its downy red hairs and its ‘doigts de faune’. He glanced at his

own white taper ɹngers, shuddering slightly in spite of himself, and

passed on, till he came to those lovely stanzas upon Venice:2 –

‘Sur une gamme chromatique, 

        Le sein de perles ruisselant, 

La Ve´nus de l’Adriatique 

        Sort de l’eau son corps rose et blanc.

Les dômes, sur l’azur des ondes 

        Suivant la phrase au pur contour, 

S’enɻent comme des gorges rondes 

        Que souléve un soupir d’amour.

L’esquif aborde et me deépose, 

        Jetant son amarre au pilier, 

Devant une façade rose, 

        Sur le marbre d’un escalier.’

How exquisite they were! As one read them, one seemed to be

ɻoating down the green waterways of the pink and pearl city, seated

in a black gondola with silver prow and trailing curtains. The mere

lines looked to him like those straight lines of turquoise-blue that

follow one as one pushes out to the Lido. The sudden ɻashes of

colour reminded him of the gleam of the opal-and-iris-throated birds

that ɻutter round the tall honeycombed Campanile, or stalk, with

such stately grace, through the dim, dust-stained arcades. Leaning

back with half-closed eyes, he kept saying over and over to himself:

–

‘Devant une fac¸ade rose, 

Sur le marbre d’un escalier.’

The whole of Venice was in those two lines. He remembered the

autumn that he had passed there, and a wonderful love that had

stirred him to mad, delightful follies. There was romance in every

place. But Venice, like Oxford, had kept the background for

romance, and, to the true romantic, background was everything, or

almost everything. Basil had been with him part of the time, and

had gone wild over Tintoret. Poor Basil! what a horrible way for a

man to die!

contralto voice, the ‘monstre 
charmant’3 that couches in the

porphyry-room of the Louvre. But after a time the book fell from his

hand. He grew nervous, and a horrible ɹt of terror came over him.

What if Alan Campbell should be out of England? Days would elapse

before he would come back. Perhaps he might refuse to come. What

could he do then? Every moment was of vital importance.

They had been great friends once, ɹve years before – almost

inseparable, indeed. Then the intimacy had come suddenly to an

end. When they met in society now, it was only Dorian Gray who

smiled: Alan Campbell never did.

He was an extremely clever young man, though he had no real

appreciation of the visible arts, and whatever little sense of the

beauty of poetry he possessed he had gained entirely from Dorian.

His dominant intellectual passion was for science. At Cambridge he

had taken a good class in the Natural Science Tripos4 of his year.

Indeed, he was still devoted to the study of chemistry, and had a

laboratory of his own, in which he used to shut himself up all day

long, greatly to the annoyance of his mother, who had set her heart

on his standing for Parliament and had a vague idea that a chemist

was a person who made up prescriptions. He was an excellent

musician, however, as well, and played both the violin and the

piano better than most amateurs. In fact, it was music that had ɹrst

brought him and Dorian Gray together – music and that indeɹnable

attraction that Dorian seemed to be able to exercise whenever he

wished, and indeed exercised often without being conscious of it.

They had met at Lady Berkshire’s the night that Rubinstein5 played

there and after that used to be always seen together at the Opera,

and wherever good music was going on. For eighteen months their

intimacy lasted. Campbell was always either at Selby Royal or in

Grosvenor Square. To him, as to many others, Dorian Gray was the

type of everything that is wonderful and fascinating in life. Whether

or not a quarrel had taken place between them no one ever knew.

But suddenly people remarked that they scarcely spoke when they

met, and that Campbell seemed always to go away early from any

party at which Dorian Gray was present. He had changed, too – was

strangely melancholy at times, appeared almost to dislike hearing

music, and would never himself play, giving as his excuse, when he

was called upon, that he was so absorbed in science that he had no

time left in which to practise. And this was certainly true. Every day

connection with certain curious experiments.

This was the man Dorian Gray was waiting for. Every second he

kept glancing at the clock. As the minutes went by he became

strides. His hands were curiously cold.

The suspense became unbearable. Time seemed to him to be

knew what was waiting for him there; saw it indeed, and,

foul puppet on a stand, and grinned through moving masks. Then,

suddenly, Time stopped for him. Yes: that blind, slow-breathing

thing crawled no more, and horrible thoughts, Time being dead,

raced nimbly on in front, and dragged a hideous future from its

him stone.

At last the door opened, and his servant entered. He turned

glazed eyes upon him.

‘Mr Campbell, sir,’ said the man.

A sigh of relief broke from his parched lips, and the colour came

back to his cheeks.

‘Ask him to come in at once, Francis.’ He felt that he was himself

again. His mood of cowardice had passed away.

The man bowed, and retired. In a few moments Alan Campbell

walked in, looking very stern and rather pale, his pallor being

intensiɹed by his coal-black hair and dark eyebrows.

‘Alan! this is kind of you. I thank you for coming.’

‘I had intended never to enter your house again, Gray. But you

said it was a matter of life and death.’ His voice was hard and cold.

He spoke with slow deliberation. There was a look of contempt in

the steady searching gaze that he turned on Dorian. He kept his

hands in the pockets of his Astrakhan coat, and seemed not to have

noticed the gesture with which he had been greeted.

‘Yes: it is a matter of life and death, Alan, and to more than one

person. Sit down.’

Campbell took a chair by the table, and Dorian sat opposite to

him. The two men’s eyes met. In Dorian’s there was inɹnite pity. He

knew that what he was going to do was dreadful.

After a strained moment of silence, he leaned across and said,

very quietly, but watching the eʃects of each word upon the face of

him he had sent for, ‘Alan, in a locked room at the top of this house,

a room to which nobody but myself has access, a dead man is seated

matters that do not concern you. What you have to do is this –’

‘Stop, Gray. I don’t want to know anything further. Whether

secrets to yourself. They don’t interest me any more.’

‘Alan, they will have to interest you. This one will have to

interest you. I am awfully sorry for you, Alan. But I can’t help

myself. You are the one man who is able to save me. I am forced to

bring you into the matter. I have no option. Alan, you are scientiɹc.

You know about chemistry, and things of that kind. You have made

experiments. What you have got to do is to destroy the thing that is

upstairs – to destroy it so that not a vestige of it will be left. Nobody

Alan, you must change him, and everything that belongs to him,

into a handful of ashes that I may scatter in the air.’

‘You are mad, Dorian.’

‘Ah! I was waiting for you to call me Dorian.’

‘You are mad, I tell you – mad to imagine that I would raise a

ɹnger to help you, mad to make this monstrous confession. I will

have nothing to do with this matter, whatever it is. Do you think I

devil’s work you are up to?’

‘It was suicide, Alan.’

‘I am glad of that. But who drove him to it? You, I should fancy.’

‘Do you still refuse to do this for me?’

‘Of course I refuse. I will have absolutely nothing to do with it. I

don’t care what shame comes on you. You deserve it all. I should

not be sorry to see you disgraced, publicly disgraced. How dare you

ask me, of all men in the world, to mix myself up in this horror? I

should have thought you knew more about people’s characters. Your

friend Lord Henry Wotton can’t have taught you much about

psychology, whatever else he has taught you. Nothing will induce

me to stir a step to help you. You have come to the wrong man. Go

to some of your friends. Don’t come to me.’

‘Alan, it was murder. I killed him. You don’t know what he had

made me suʃer. Whatever my life is, he had more to do with the

making or the marring of it than poor Harry has had. He may not

have intended it, the result was the same.’

‘Murder! Good God, Dorian, is that what you have come to? I

shall not inform upon you. It is not my business. Besides, without

my stirring in the matter, you are certain to be arrested. Nobody

ever commits a crime without doing something stupid. But I will

have nothing to do with it.’

‘You must have something to do with it. Wait, wait a moment;

listen to me. Only listen, Alan. All I ask of you is to perform a

blood to ɻow through, you would simply look upon him as an

admirable subject. You would not turn a hair. You would not

increasing the sum of knowledge in the world, or gratifying

intellectual curiosity, or something of that kind. What I want you to

body must be far less horrible than what you are accustomed to

If it is discovered, I am lost; and it is sure to be discovered unless

you help me.’

‘I have no desire to help you. You forget that. I am simply

indiʃerent to the whole thing. It has nothing to do with me.’

‘Alan, I entreat you. Think of the position I am in. Just before

the scientiɹc point of view. You don’t inquire where the dead things

on which you experiment come from. Don’t inquire now. I have told

you too much as it is. But I beg of you to do this. We were friends

once, Alan.’

‘Don’t speak about those days, Dorian: they are dead.’

for what I have done.’

‘There is no good in prolonging this scene. I absolutely refuse to

do anything in the matter. It is insane of you to ask me.’

‘You refuse?’

‘Yes.’

‘I entreat you, Alan.’

‘It is useless.’

The same look of pity came into Dorian Gray’s eyes. Then he

stretched out his hand, took a piece of paper, and wrote something

on it. He read it over twice, folded it carefully, and pushed it across

the table. Having done this, he got up, and went over to the

window.

Campbell looked at him in surprise, and then took up the paper,

and opened it. As he read it, his face became ghastly pale, and he

fell back in his chair. A horrible sense of sickness came over him. He

felt as if his heart was beating itself to death in some empty hollow.

After two or three minutes of terrible silence, Dorian turned

round, and came and stood behind him, putting his hand upon his

shoulder.

terms.’

Campbell buried his face in his hands, and a shudder passed

through him.

‘Yes, it is my turn to dictate terms, Alan. You know what they

fever. The thing has to be done. Face it, and do it.’

A groan broke from Campbell’s lips, and he shivered all over.

The ticking of the clock on the mantelpiece seemed to him to be

dividing Time into separate atoms of agony, each of which was too

terrible to be borne. He felt as if an iron ring was being slowly

tightened round his forehead, as if the disgrace with which he was

threatened had already come upon him. The hand upon his shoulder

weighed like a hand of lead. It was intolerable. It seemed to crush

him.

‘Come, Alan, you must decide at once.’

‘I cannot do it,’ he said, mechanically, as though words could

alter things.

‘You must. You have no choice. Don’t delay.’

He hesitated a moment. ‘Is there a ɹre in the room upstairs?’

‘Yes, there is a gas-ɹre with asbestos.’

‘I shall have to go home and get some things from the

laboratory.’

‘No, Alan, you must not leave the house. Write out on a sheet of

note-paper what you want, and my servant will take a cab and bring

the things back to you.’

Campbell scrawled a few lines, blotted them, and addressed an

envelope to his assistant. Dorian took the note up and read it

carefully. Then he rang the bell, and gave it to his valet, with orders

to return as soon as possible, and to bring the things with him.

As the hall door shut, Campbell started nervously, and, having

got up from the chair, went over to the chimney-piece. He was

shivering with a kind of ague. For nearly twenty minutes, neither of

the men spoke. A ɻy buzzed noisily about the room, and the ticking

of the clock was like the beat of a hammer.

As the chime struck one, Campbell turned round, and, looking at

Dorian Gray, saw that his eyes were ɹlled with tears. There was

something in the purity and reɹnement of that sad face that seemed

to enrage him. ‘You are infamous, absolutely infamous!’ he

muttered.

‘Hush, Alan: you have saved my life,’ said Dorian.

not of your life that I am thinking.’

‘Ah, Alan,’ murmured Dorian, with a sigh, ‘I wish you had a

away as he spoke, and stood looking out at the garden. Campbell

made no answer.

After about ten minutes a knock came to the door, and the

servant entered, carrying a large mahogany chest of chemicals, with

shaped iron clamps.

‘Shall I leave the things here, sir?’ he asked Campbell.

‘Yes,’ said Dorian. ‘And I am afraid, Francis, that I have another

errand for you. What is the name of the man at Richmond who

supplies Selby with orchids?’

‘Harden, sir.’

‘Yes – Harden. You must go down to Richmond at once, see

Harden personally, and tell him to send twice as many orchids as I

ordered, and to have as few white ones as possible. In fact, I don’t

want any white ones. It is a lovely day, Francis, and Richmond is a

very pretty place, otherwise I wouldn’t bother you about it.’

‘No trouble, sir. At what time shall I be back?’

third person in the room seemed to give him extraordinary courage.

Campbell frowned, and bit his lip. ‘It will take about ɹve hours,’

he answered.

‘It will be time enough, then, if you are back at half-past seven,

the evening to yourself. I am not dining at home, so I shall not want

you.’

‘Thank you, sir,’ said the man, leaving the room.

‘Now, Alan, there is not a moment to be lost. How heavy this

chest is! I’ll take it for you. You bring the other things.’ He spoke

rapidly, and in an authoritative manner. Campbell felt dominated by

him. They left the room together.

When they reached the top landing, Dorian took out the key and

turned it in the lock. Then he stopped, and a troubled look came

into his eyes. He shuddered. ‘I don’t think I can go in, Alan,’ he

murmured.

‘It is nothing to me. I don’t require you,’ said Campbell, coldly.

Dorian half opened the door. As he did so, he saw the face of his

portrait leering in the sunlight. On the ɻoor in front of it the torn

curtain was lying. He remembered that the night before he had

forgotten, for the ɹrst time in his life, to hide the fatal canvas, and

was about to rush forward, when he drew back with a shudder.

What was that loathsome red dew that gleamed, wet and

there, as he had left it.

He heaved a deep breath, opened the door a little wider, and

with half-closed eyes and averted head walked quickly in,

determined that he would not look even once upon the dead man.

Then, stooping down, and taking up the gold-and-purple hanging,

he ɻung it right over the picture.

There he stopped, feeling afraid to turn round, and his eyes ɹxed

things that he had required for his dreadful work. He began to

wonder if he and Basil Hallward had ever met, and, if so, what they

had thought of each other.

‘Leave me now,’ said a stern voice behind him.

He turned and hurried out, just conscious that the dead man had

been thrust back into the chair, and that Campbell was gazing into a

glistening yellow face. As he was going downstairs he heard the key

being turned in the lock.

It was long after seven when Campbell came back into the

library. He was pale, but absolutely calm. ‘I have done what you

each other again.’

Dorian, simply.

As soon as Campbell had left, he went upstairs. There was a

horrible smell of nitric acid in the room. But the thing that had been

sitting at the table was gone.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER XV

That evening, at eight-thirty, exquisitely dressed, and wearing a

large buttonhole of Parma violets, Dorian Gray was ushered into

Lady Narborough’s drawing-room by bowing servants. His forehead

was throbbing with maddened nerves, and he felt wildly excited,

but his manner as he bent over his hostess’s hand was as easy and

graceful as ever. Perhaps one never seems so much at one’s ease as

when one has to play a part. Certainly no one looking at Dorian

Gray that night could have believed that he had passed through a

tragedy as horrible as any tragedy of our age. Those ɹnely-shaped

ɹngers could never have clutched a knife for sin, nor those smiling

lips have cried out on God and goodness. He himself could not help

wondering at the calm of his demeanour, and for a moment felt

keenly the terrible pleasure of a double life.

It was a small party, got up rather in a hurry by Lady

Narborough, who was a very clever woman, with what Lord Henry

used to describe as the remains of really remarkable ugliness. She

had proved an excellent wife to one of our most tedious

ambassadors, and having buried her husband properly in a marble

mausoleum, which she had herself designed, and married oʃ her

daughters to some rich, rather elderly men, she devoted herself now

to the pleasures of French ɹction, French cookery, and French esprit

when she could get it.

he was dreadfully shortsighted, and there is no pleasure in taking in

a husband who never sees anything.’

Her guests this evening were rather tedious. The fact was, as she

explained to Dorian, behind a very shabby fan, one of her married

make matters worse, had actually brought her husband with her. ‘I

think it is most unkind of her, my dear,’ she whispered. ‘Of course I

go and stay with them every summer after I come from Homburg,

besides, I really wake them up. You don’t know what an existence

they lead down there. It is pure unadulterated country life. They get

up early, because they have so much to do, and go to bed early

because they have so little to think about. There has not been a

scandal in the neighbourhood since the time of Queen Elizabeth,

next either of them. You shall sit by me, and amuse me.’

with a hooked nose, who was always trying to get herself

compromised, but was so peculiarly plain that to her great

never remembered; and her husband, a red-cheeked, white-

ideas.

He was rather sorry he had come, till Lady Narborough, looking

at the great ormolu gilt clock that sprawled in gaudy curves on the

promised faithfully not to disappoint me.’

It was some consolation that Harry was to be there, and when

to some insincere apology, he ceased to feel bored.

thirst seemed to increase.

‘Dorian,’ said Lord Henry, at last, as the chaud-jroid1 was being

handed round, ‘what is the matter with you to-night? You are quite

out of sorts.’

‘I believe he is in love,’ cried Lady Narborough, ‘and that he is

afraid to tell me for fear I should be jealous. He is quite right. I

certainly should.’

‘Dear Lady Narborough,’ murmured Dorian, smiling, ‘I have not

been in love for a whole week – not, in fact, since Madame de Ferrol

left town.’

‘How you men can fall in love with that woman!’ exclaimed the

old lady. ‘I really cannot understand it.’

‘It is simply because she remembers you when you were a little

girl, Lady Narborough,’ said Lord Henry. ‘She is the one link

between us and your short frocks.’

‘She does not remember my short frocks at all, Lord Henry. But I

remember her very well at Vienna thirty years ago, and how

décolletée she was then.’

‘She is still décolletée ,’ he answered, taking an olive in his long

When her third husband died, her hair turned quite gold from grief’2

‘How can you, Harry!’ cried Dorian.

‘It is a most romantic explanation,’ laughed the hostess. ‘But her

third husband, Lord Henry! You don’t mean to say Ferrol is the

fourth?’

‘Certainly, Lady Narborough.’

‘I don’t believe a word of it.’

‘Well, ask Mr Gray. He is one of her most intimate friends.’

‘Is it true, Mr Gray?’

‘She assures me so, Lady Narborough,’ said Dorian. ‘I asked her

whether, like Marguerite de Navarre, she had their hearts embalmed

and hung at her girdle. She told me she didn’t, because none of

them had had any hearts at all.’

‘Four husbands! Upon my word that is trop de zéle.’

‘Trop d’audace,3 I tell her,’ said Dorian.

‘Oh! she is audacious enough for anything, my dear. And what is

Ferrol like? I don’t know him.’

‘The husbands of very beautiful women belong to the criminal

classes,’ said Lord Henry, sipping his wine.

all surprised that the world says that you are extremely wicked.’

‘But what world says that?’ asked Lord Henry, elevating his

excellent terms.’

‘Everybody I know says you are very wicked,’ cried the old lady,

shaking her head.

Lord Henry looked serious for some moments. ‘It is perfectly

monstrous,’ he said, at last, ‘the way people go about nowadays

saying things against one behind one’s back that are absolutely and

entirely true.’

‘Isn’t he incorrigible?’ cried Dorian, leaning forward in his chair.

‘I hope so,’ said his hostess, laughing. ‘But really if you all

worship Madame de Ferrol in this ridiculous way, I shall have to

marry again so as to be in the fashion.’

‘You will never marry again, Lady Narborough,’ broke in Lord

Henry. ‘You were far too happy. When a woman marries again it is

because she detested her ɹrst husband. When a man marries again,

it is because he adored his ɹrst wife. Women try their luck; men risk

theirs.’

‘Narborough wasn’t perfect,’ cried the old lady.

‘If he had been, you would not have loved him, my dear lady,’

was the rejoinder. ‘Women love us for our defects. If we have

enough of them they will forgive us everything, even our intellects.

Lady Narborough; but it is quite true.’

men live like bachelors, and all the bachelors like married men.’

‘Fin de siécle,’4 murmured Lord Henry.

‘Fin du globe,’ answered his hostess.

‘I wish it were ɹn du globe,’ said Dorian, with a sigh. ‘Life is a

great disappointment.’

‘Ah, my dear,’ cried Lady Narborough, putting on her gloves,

‘don’t tell me that you have exhausted Life. When a man says that

one knows that Life has exhausted him. Lord Henry is very wicked,

and I sometimes wish that I had been; but you are made to be good

– you look so good. I must ɹnd you a nice wife. Lord Henry, don’t

you think that Mr Gray should get married?’

‘I am always telling him so, Lady Narborough,’ said Lord Henry,

with a bow.

‘Well, we must look out for a suitable match for him. I shall go

through Debrett5 carefully to-night, and draw out a list of all the

eligible young ladies.’

‘With their ages, Lady Narborough?’ asked Dorian.

suitable alliance, and I want you both to be happy.’

‘What nonsense people talk about happy marriages!’ exclaimed

Lord Henry. ‘A man can be happy with any woman, as long as he

does not love her.’

‘Ah! what a cynic you are!’ cried the old lady, pushing back her

me soon again. You are really an admirable tonic, much better than

you would like to meet, though. I want it to be a delightful

gathering.’

‘I like men who have a future, and women who have a past,’ he

answered. ‘Or do you think that would make it a petticoat party?’

‘I fear so,’ she said, laughing, as she stood up. ‘A thousand

ɹnished your cigarette.’

‘Never mind, Lady Narborough. I smoke a great deal too much. I

am going to limit myself, for the future.’

‘Pray don’t, Lady Ruxton,’ said Lord Henry. ‘Moderation is a fatal

thing. Enough is as bad as a meal. More than enough is as good as a

feast.’

Lady Ruxton glanced at him curiously. ‘You must come and

explain that to me some afternoon, Lord Henry. It sounds a

fascinating theory,’ she murmured, as she swept out of the room.

sure to squabble upstairs.’

The men laughed, and Mr Chapman got up solemnly from the

a loud voice about the situation in the House of Commons. He

guʃawed at his adversaries. The word doctrinaire – word full of

his explosions. An alliterative preɹx served as an ornament of

jovially termed it – was shown to be the proper bulwark for Society.

A smiled curved Lord Henry’s lips, and he turned round and

looked at Dorian.

‘Are you better, my dear fellow?’ he asked. ‘You seemed rather

out of sorts at dinner.’

‘I am quite well, Harry. I am tired. That is all.’

‘You were charming last night. The little Duchess is quite

devoted to you. She tells me she is going down to Selby.’

‘She has promised to come on the twentieth.’

‘Is Monmouth to be there too?’

‘Oh, yes, Harry.’

and what ɹre does not destroy, it hardens. She has had experiences.’

‘How long has she been married?’ asked Dorian.

‘An eternity, she tells me. I believe, according to the peerage, it

eternity, with time thrown in. Who else is coming?’

‘Oh, the Willoughbys, Lord Rugby and his wife, our hostess,

Geoʃrey Clouston, the usual set. I have asked Lord Grotrian.’

‘I like him,’ said Lord Henry. ‘A great many people don’t, but I

ɹnd him charming. He atones for being occasionally somewhat

over-dressed, by being always absolutely over-educated. He is a very

modern type.’

‘I don’t know if he will be able to come, Harry. He may have to

go to Monte Carlo with his father.’

‘Ah! what a nuisance people’s people are! Try and make him

come. By the way, Dorian, you ran oʃ very early last night. You left

before eleven. What did you do afterwards? Did you go straight

home?’

Dorian glanced at him hurriedly, and frowned. ‘No, Harry,’ he

said at last, ‘I did not get home till nearly three.’

‘Did you go to the club?’

‘Yes,’ he answered. Then he bit his lip. ‘No, I don’t mean that. I

didn’t go to the club. I walked about. I forget what I did…. How

in at half-past two, if you wish to know the exact time. I had left my

corroborative evidence on the subject you can ask him.’

Lord Henry shrugged his shoulders. ‘My dear fellow, as if I

Chapman. Something has happened to you, Dorian. Tell me what it

is. You are not yourself to-night.’

‘Don’t mind me, Harry. I am irritable, and out of temper. I shall

come round and see you to-morrow, or next day. Make my excuses

to Lady Narborough. I shan’t go upstairs. I shall go home. I must go

home.’

‘All right, Dorian. I dare say I shall see you to-morrow at tea-

time. The Duchess is coming.’

‘I will try to be there, Harry,’ he said, leaving the room. As he

drove back to his own house he was conscious that the sense of

terror he thought he had strangled had come back to him. Lord

Henry’s casual questioning had made him lose his nerves for the

moment, and he wanted his nerve still. Things that were dangerous

had to be destroyed. He winced. He hated the idea of even touching

them.

hands and forehead with a cool musk-scented vinegar.

Suddenly he started. His eyes grew strangely bright, and he

gnawed nervously at his under-lip. Between two of the windows

sofa on which he had been lying, went over to it, and, having

unlocked it, touched some hidden spring. A triangular drawer

in, and closed on something. It was a small Chinese box of black and

gold-dust lacquer, elaborately wrought, the sides patterned with

curved waves, and the silken cords hung with round crystals and

tasselled in plaited metal threads. He opened it. Inside was a green

paste waxy in lustre,6 the odour curiously heavy and persistent.

cabinet doors as he did so, and went into his bedroom.

As midnight was striking bronze blows upon the dusky air,

his throat, crept quietly out of his house. In Bond Street he found a

hansom with a good horse. He hailed it, and in a low voice gave the

driver an address.

The man shook his head. ‘It is too far for me,’ he muttered.

‘Here is a sovereign for you,’ said Dorian. ‘You shall have

another if you drive fast.’

‘All right, sir,’ answered the man, ‘you will be there in an hour,’

and after his fare had got in he turned his horse round, and drove

rapidly towards the river.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER XVI

A cold rain began to fall, and the blurred street-lamps looked

ghastly in the dripping mist. The public-houses were just closing,

and dim men and women were clustering in broken groups round

their doors. From some of the bars came the sound of horrible

laughter. In others, drunkards brawled and screamed.

Lying back in the hansom, with his hat pulled over his forehead,

Dorian Gray watched with listless eyes the sordid shame of the great

city, and now and then he repeated to himself the words that Lord

Henry had said to him on the ɹrst day they had met, ‘To cure the

soul by means of the senses, and the senses by means of the soul.’

Yes, that was the secret. He had often tried it, and would try it again

now. There were opium-dens, where one could buy oblivion, dens of

horror where the memory of old sins could be destroyed by the

madness of sins that were new.

The moon hung low in the sky like a yellow skull. From time to

time a huge misshapen cloud stretched a long arm across and hid it.

The gas-lamps grew fewer, and the streets more narrow and gloomy.

Once the man lost his way, and had to drive back half a mile.1 A

steam rose from the horse as it splashed up the puddles. The side-

windows of the hansom were clogged with a grey-ɻannel mist.

‘To cure the soul by means of the senses, and the senses by

means of the soul!’ How the words rang in his ears! His soul,

certainly, was sick to death. Was it true that the senses could cure

spoken to him as he had done? Who had made him a judge over

endured.

On and on plodded the hansom, going slower, it seemed to him,

faster. The hideous hunger for opium began to gnaw at him. His

whipped up. He laughed in answer, and the man was silent.

The way seemed interminable, and the streets like the black web

of some sprawling spider. The monotony became unbearable, and,

as the mist thickened, he felt afraid.

Then they passed by lonely brickɹelds. The fog was lighter here,

and he could see the strange bottle-shaped kilns with their orange

fan-like tongues of ɹre. A dog barked as they went by, and far away

in the darkness some wandering seagull screamed. The horse

stumbled in a rut, then swerved aside, and broke into a gallop.

After some time they left the clay road, and rattled again over

rough-paven streets. Most of the windows were dark, but now and

then fantastic shadows were silhouetted against some lamp-lit blind.

He watched them curiously. They moved like monstrous

whip.

It is said that passion makes one think in a circle. Certainly with

hideous iteration the bitten lips of Dorian Gray shaped and reshaped

in them the full expression, as it were, of his mood, and justiɹed, by

still have dominated his temper. From cell to cell of his brain crept

the one thought; and the wild desire to live, most terrible of all

what he needed for forgetfulness. In three days he would be free.

Suddenly the man drew up with a jerk at the top of a dark lane.

Over the low roofs and jagged chimney-stacks of the houses rose the

black masts of ships. Wreaths of white mist clung like ghostly sails

to the yards.

the trap.

Dorian started, and peered round. ‘This will do,’ he answered,

Here and there a lantern gleamed at the stern of some huge

glare came from an outward-bound steamer that was coaling. The

slimy pavement looked like a wet mackintosh.

He hurried on towards the left, glancing back now and then to

reached a small shabby house, that was wedged in between two

gaunt factories. In one of the top-windows stood a lamp. He

stopped, and gave a peculiar knock.2

After a little time he heard steps in the passage, and the chain

being unhooked. The door opened quietly, and he went in without

saying a word to the squat misshapen ɹgure that ɻattened itself into

the shadow as he passed. At the end of the hall hung a tattered

green curtain that swayed and shook in the gusty wind which had

followed him in from the street. He dragged it aside, and entered a

long, low room which looked as if it had once been a third-rate

dancing-saloon. Shrill ɻaring gas-jets, dulled and distorted in the

ɻy-blown mirrors that faced them, were ranged round the walls.

Greasy reɻectors of ribbed tin backed them, making quivering discs

of light. The ɻoor was covered with ochre-coloured sawdust,

whimper.

At the end of the room there was a little staircase, leading to a

thin pipe, looked up at him, and nodded in a hesitating manner.

‘You here, Adrian?’ muttered Dorian.

‘Where else should I be?’ he answered, listlessly. ‘None of the

chaps will speak to me now.’

‘I thought you had left England.’

‘Darlington is not going to do anything. My brother paid the bill

at last. George doesn’t speak to me either…. I don’t care,’ he added,

with a sigh. ‘As long as one has this stuʃ, one doesn’t want friends. I

think I have had too many friends.’

He wanted to be where no one would know who he was. He wanted

to escape from himself.

‘I am going on to the other place,’ he said, after a pause.

‘On the wharf?’

‘Yes.’

‘That mad-cat is sure to be there. They won’t have her in this

place now.’

Dorian shrugged his shoulders. ‘I am sick of women who love

one. Women who hate one are much more interesting. Besides, the

stuʃ is better.’

‘Much the same.’

‘I like it better. Come and have something to drink. I must have

something.’

‘I don’t want anything,’ murmured the young man.

‘Never mind.’

Adrian Singleton.

A crooked smile, like a Malay crease, writhed across the face of

one of the women. ‘We are very proud to-night,’ she sneered.

‘For God’s sake don’t talk to me,’ cried Dorian, stamping his foot

talk to me again.’

Two red sparks ɻashed for a moment in the woman’s sodden

eyes, then ɻickered out, and left them dull and glazed. She tossed

her head, and raked the coins oʃ the counter with greedy ɹngers.

Her companion watched her enviously.

‘It’s no use,’ sighed Adrian Singleton. ‘I don’t care to go back.

What does it matter? I am quite happy here.’

‘You will write to me if you want anything, won’t you?’ said

Dorian, after a pause.

‘Perhaps.’

‘Good-night, then.’

‘Good-night,’ answered the young man, passing up the steps, and

wiping his parched mouth with a handkerchief.

bargain!’ she hiccoughed, in a hoarse voice.

‘Curse you!’ he answered, ‘don’t call me that.’

She snapped her ɹngers. ‘Prince Charming is what you like to be

called, ain’t it?’ she yelled after him. The drowsy sailor leapt to his

feet as she spoke, and looked wildly round. The sound of the

shutting of the hall door fell on his ear. He rushed out as if in

pursuit.

Dorian Gray hurried along the quay through the drizzling rain.

His meeting with Adrian Singleton had strangely moved him, and he

wondered if the ruin of that young life was really to be laid at his

door, as Basil Hallward had said to him with such infamy of insult.

He bit his lip, and for a few seconds his eyes grew sad. Yet, after all,

what did it matter to him? One’s days were too brief to take the

burden of another’s errors on one’s shoulders. Each man lived his

own life, and paid his own price for living it. The only pity was one

had to pay so often for a single fault. One had to pay over and over

again, indeed. In her dealings with man Destiny never closed her

accounts.

There are moments, psychologists tell us, when the passion for

sin, or for what the world calls sin, so dominates a nature, that

every ɹbre of the body, as every cell of the brain, seems to be

instinct with fearful impulses. Men and women at such moments

that he fell.

Callous, concentrated on evil, with stained mind, and soul

as he went, but as he darted aside into a dim archway, that had

going, he felt himself suddenly seized from behind, and before he

a brutal hand round his throat.

He struggled madly for life, and by a terrible eʃort wrenched the

tightening ɹngers away. In a second he heard the click of a revolver,

and saw the gleam of a polished barrel pointing straight at his head,

and the dusky form of a short thick-set man facing him.

‘What do you want?’ he gasped.

‘Keep quiet,’ said the man. ‘If you stir, I shoot you.’

‘You are mad. What have I done to you?’

‘You wrecked the life of Sibyl Vane,’ was the answer, ‘and Sibyl

Vane was my sister. She killed herself. I know it. Her death is at

your door. I swore I would kill you in return. For years I have

sought you. I had no clue, no trace. The two people who could have

with God, for to-night you are going to die.’

Dorian Gray grew sick with fear. ‘I never knew her,’ he

stammered. ‘I never heard of her. You are mad.’

‘You had better confess your sin, for as sure as I am James Vane,

know what to say or do. ‘Down on your knees!’ growled the man. ‘I

give you one minute to make your peace – no more. I go on board

all.’

Dorian’s arms fell to his side. Paralysed with terror, he did not

know what to do. Suddenly a wild hope ɻashed across his brain.

‘Stop,’ he cried. ‘How long ago is it since your sister died? Quick,

tell me!’

‘Eighteen years,’ said the man. ‘Why do you ask me? What do

years matter?’

‘Eighteen years,’ laughed Dorian Gray, with a touch of triumph

in his voice. ‘Eighteen years! Set me under the lamp and look at my

face!’

James Vane hesitated for a moment, not understanding what was

meant. Then he seized Dorian Gray and dragged him from the

archway.

Dim and wavering as was the windblown light, yet it served to

show him the hideous error, as it seemed, into which he had fallen,

was obvious that this was not the man who had destroyed her life.

He loosened his hold and reeled back. ‘My God! my God!’ he

cried, ‘and I would have murdered you!’

Dorian Gray drew a long breath. ‘You have been on the brink of

sternly.

‘Let this be a warning to you not to take vengeance into your

own hands.’

‘Forgive me, sir,’ muttered James Vane. ‘I was deceived. A

chance word I heard in that damned den set me on the wrong track.’

‘You had better go home, and put that pistol away, or you may

get into trouble,’ said Dorian, turning on his heel, and going slowly

down the street.

James Vane stood on the pavement in horror. He was trembling

from head to foot. After a little while a black shadow that had been

creeping along the dripping wall, moved out into the light and came

close to him with stealthy footsteps. He felt a hand laid on his arm

and looked round with a start. It was one of the women who had

been drinking at the bar.

‘Why didn’t you kill him?’ she hissed out, putting her haggard

face quite close to his. ‘I knew you were following him when you

has lots of money, and he’s as bad as bad.’

have not got his blood upon my hands.’

The woman gave a bitter laugh. ‘Little more than a boy!’ she

sneered. ‘Why, man, it’s nigh on eighteen years since Prince

Charming made me what I am.’

‘You lie!’ cried James Vane.

She raised her hand up to heaven. ‘Before God I am telling the

truth,’ she cried.

‘Before God?’

‘Strike me dumb if it ain’t so. He is the worst one that comes

here. They say he has sold himself to the devil for a pretty face. It’s

nigh on eighteen years since I met him. He hasn’t changed much

since then. I have though,’ she added, with a sickly leer.

‘You swear this?’

‘I swear it,’ came in hoarse echo from her ɻat mouth. ‘But don’t

give me away to him,’ she whined; ‘I am afraid of him. Let me have

some money for my night’s lodging.’

He broke from her with an oath, and rushed to the corner of the

street, but Dorian Gray had disappeared. When he looked back, the

woman had vanished also.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER XVII

A week later Dorian Gray was sitting in the conservatory at Selby

Royal talking to the pretty Duchess of Monmouth, who with her

husband, a jaded-looking man of sixty, was amongst his guests. It

was tea-time, and the mellow light of the huge lace-covered lamp

that stood on the table lit up the delicate china and hammered silver

of the service at which the Duchess was presiding. Her white hands

were moving daintily among the cups, and her full red lips were

smiling at something that Dorian had whispered to her. Lord Henry

was lying back in a silk-draped wicker chair looking at them. On a

peach-coloured divan sat Lady Narborough pretending to listen to

the Duke’s description of the last Brazilian beetle that he had added

to his collection. Three young men in elaborate smoking-suits were

handing tea-cakes to some of the women. The house-party consisted

of twelve people, and there were more expected to arrive on the

next day.

‘What are you two talking about?’ said Lord Henry, strolling over

to the table, and putting his cup down. ‘I hope Dorian has told you

about my plan for rechristening everything, Gladys. It is a delightful

idea.’

‘But I don’t want to be rechristened, Harry,’ rejoined the

Duchess, looking up at him with her wonderful eyes. ‘I am quite

satisɹed with my own name, and I am sure Mr Gray should be

satisɹed with his.’

literature. The man who could call a spade a spade should be

compelled to use one. It is the only thing he is ɹt for.’

‘Then what should we call you, Harry?’ she asked.

‘His name is Prince Paradox,’ said Dorian.

‘I recognize him in a ɻash,’ exclaimed the Duchess.

‘I won’t hear of it,’ laughed Lord Henry, sinking into a chair.

‘From a label there is no escape! I refuse the title.’

‘Royalties may not abdicate,’ fell as a warning from pretty lips.

‘You wish me to defend my throne, then?’

‘Yes.’

‘I give the truths of to-morrow.’

‘I prefer the mistakes of to-day,’ she answered.

‘You disarm me, Gladys,’ he cried, catching the wilfulness of her

mood.

‘Of your shield, Harry: not of your spear.’

‘I never tilt against Beauty,’ he said, with a wave of his hand.

‘That is your error, Harry, believe me. You value beauty far too

much.’

‘How can you say that? I admit that I think that it is better to be

beautiful than to be good. But on the other hand no one is more

ready than I am to acknowledge that it is better to be good than to

be ugly.’

‘Ugliness is one of the seven deadly sins, then?’ cried the

Duchess. ‘What becomes of your simile about the orchid?’

‘Ugliness is one of the seven deadly virtues, Gladys. You, as a

good Tory, must not underrate them. Beer, the Bible, and the seven

deadly virtues have made our England what she is.’

‘You don’t like your country, then?’ she asked.

‘I live in it.’

‘That you may censure it the better.’

‘Would you have me take the verdict of Europe on it?’ he

inquired.

‘What do they say of us.’

‘That Tartuʃe1 has emigrated to England and opened a shop.’

‘Is that yours, Harry?’

‘I give it to you.’

‘I could not use it. It is too true.’

‘You need not be afraid. Our countrymen never recognize a

description.’

‘They are practical.’

ledger, they balance stupidity by wealth, and vice by hypocrisy.’

‘Still, we have done great things.’

‘Great things have been thrust on us, Gladys.’

‘We have carried their burden.’

‘Only as far as the Stock Exchange.’

She shook her head. ‘I believe in the race,’ she cried.

‘It represents the survival of the pushing.’

‘It has development.’

‘Decay fascinates me more.’

‘What of Art?’ she asked.

‘It is a malady.’2

‘Love?’

‘An illusion.’

‘Religion?’

‘The fashionable substitute for Belief.’

‘You are a sceptic.’

‘Never! Scepticism is the beginning of Faith.’

‘What are you?’

‘To deɹne is to limit.’

‘Give me a clue.’

‘Threads snap. You would lose your way in the labyrinth.’

‘You bewilder me. Let us talk of some one else.’

‘Our host is a delightful topic. Years ago he was christened

Prince Charming.’

‘Ah! don’t remind me of that,’ cried Dorian Gray.

‘Our host is rather horrid this evening,’ answered the Duchess,

colouring. ‘I believe he thinks that Monmouth married me on purely

scientiɹc principles as the best specimen he could ɹnd of a modern

butterɻy.’

‘Well, I hope he won’t stick pins into you, Duchess,’ laughed

Dorian.

‘Oh! my maid does that already, Mr Gray, when she is annoyed

with me.’

‘And what does she get annoyed with you about, Duchess?’

‘For the most trivial things, Mr Gray, I assure you. Usually

because I come in at ten minutes to nine and tell her that I must be

dressed by half-past eight.’

‘How unreasonable of her! You should give her warning.’

‘I daren’t, Mr Gray. Why, she invents hats for me. You remember

the one I wore at Lady Hilstone’s garden-party? You don’t, but it is

nice of you to pretend that you do. Well, she made it out of nothing.

All good hats are made out of nothing.’

‘Like all good reputations, Gladys,’ interrupted Lord Henry.

‘Every eʃect that one produces gives one an enemy. To be popular

one must be a mediocrity.’

‘Not with women,’ said the Duchess, shaking her head; ‘and

women rule the world. I assure you we can’t bear mediocrities. We

with your eyes, if you ever love at all.’

‘It seems to me that we never do anything else,’ murmured

Dorian.

‘Ah! then, you never really love, Mr Gray,’ answered the

Duchess, with mock sadness.

‘My dear Gladys!’ cried Lord Henry. ‘How can you say that?

Romance lives by repetition, and repetition converts an appetite into

ever loved. Diʃerence of object does not alter singleness of passion.

It merely intensiɹes it. We can have in life but one great experience

at best, and the secret of life is to reproduce that experience as often

as possible.’

‘Even when one has been wounded by it, Harry?’ asked the

Duchess, after a pause.

‘Especially when one has been wounded by it,’ answered Lord

Henry.

The Duchess turned and looked at Dorian Gray with a curious

expression in her eyes. ‘What do you say to that, Mr Gray?’ she

inquired.

laughed. ‘I always agree with Harry, Duchess.’

‘Even when he is wrong?’

‘Harry is never wrong, Duchess.’

‘And does his philosophy make you happy?’

‘I have never searched for happiness. Who wants happiness? I

have searched for pleasure.’

‘And found it, Mr Gray?’

‘Often. Too often.’

The Duchess sighed. ‘I am searching for peace,’ she said, ‘and if I

don’t go and dress, I shall have none this evening.’

‘Let me get you some orchids, Duchess,’ cried Dorian, starting to

his feet, and walking down the conservatory.

‘You are ɻirting disgracefully with him,’ said Lord Henry to his

cousin. ‘You had better take care. He is very fascinating.’

‘If he were not, there would be no battle.’

‘Greek meets Greek, then?’

‘I am on the side of the Trojans. They fought for a woman.’

‘They were defeated.’

‘There are worse things than capture,’ she answered.

‘You gallop with a loose rein.’

‘Pace gives life,’ was the riposte.

‘I shall write it in my diary to-night.’

‘What?’

‘That a burnt child loves the ɹre.’

‘I am not even singed. My wings are untouched.’

‘You use them for everything, except ɻight.’

‘Courage has passed from men to women. It is a new experience

for us.’

‘You have a rival.’

‘Who?’

He laughed. ‘Lady Narborough,’ he whispered. ‘She perfectly

adores him.’

‘You ɹll me with apprehension. The appeal to Antiquity is fatal

to us who are romanticists.’

‘Romanticists! You have all the methods of science.’

‘Men have educated us.’

‘But not explained you.’

‘Describe us as a sex,’ was her challenge.

‘Sphynxes without secrets.’

She looked at him, smiling. ‘How long Mr Gray is!’ she said. ‘Let

us go and help him. I have not yet told him the colour of my frock.’

‘Ah! you must suit your frock to his ɻowers, Gladys.’

‘That would be a premature surrender.’

‘Romantic Art begins with its climax.’

‘I must keep an opportunity for retreat.’

‘In the Parthian manner?’3

‘They found safety in the desert. I could not do that.’

‘Women are not always allowed a choice,’ he answered, but

hardly had he ɹnished the sentence before from the far end of the

conservatory came a stiɻed groan, followed by the dull sound of a

heavy fall. Everybody started up. The Duchess stood motionless in

horror. And with fear in his eyes Lord Henry rushed through the

ɻapping palms, to ɹnd Dorian Gray lying face downwards on the

tiled ɻoor in a death-like swoon.

He was carried at once into the blue drawing-room, and laid

upon one of the sofas. After a short time he came to himself, and

looked round with a dazed expression.

‘What has happened?’ he asked. ‘Oh! I remember. Am I safe here,

Harry?’ He began to tremble.

‘My dear Dorian,’ answered Lord Henry, ‘you merely fainted.

That was all. You must have overtired yourself. You had better not

come down to dinner. I will take your place.’

‘No, I will come down,’ he said, struggling to his feet. ‘I would

rather come down. I must not be alone.’

He went to his room and dressed. There was a wild recklessness

of gaiety in his manner as he sat at table, but now and then a thrill

of terror ran through him when he remembered that, pressed

against the window of the conservatory, like a white handkerchief,

he had seen the face of James Vane watching him.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER XVIII

The next day he did not leave the house, and, indeed, spent most

of the time in his own room, sick with a wild terror of dying, and

yet indiʃerent to life itself. The consciousness of being hunted,

snared, tracked down, had begun to dominate him. If the tapestry

did but tremble in the wind, he shook. The dead leaves that were

blown against the leaded panes seemed to him like his own wasted

resolutions and wild regrets. When he closed his eyes, he saw again

the sailor’s face peering through the mist-stained glass, and horror

seemed once more to lay its hand upon his heart.

But perhaps it had been only his fancy that had called vengeance

out of the night, and set the hideous shapes of punishment before

him. Actual life was chaos, but there was something terribly logical

in the imagination. It was the imagination that set remorse to dog

the feet of sin. It was the imagination that made each crime bear its

misshapen brood. In the common world of fact the wicked were not

punished, nor the good rewarded. Success was given to the strong,

failure thrust upon the weak. That was all. Besides, had any stranger

been prowling round the house he would have been seen by the

servants or the keepers. Had any footmarks been found on the

ɻower-beds, the gardeners would have reported it. Yes: it had been

merely fancy. Sibyl Vane’s brother had not come back to kill him.

He had sailed away in his ship to founder in some winter sea. From

him, at any rate, he was safe. Why, the man did not know who he

was, could not know who he was. The mask of youth had saved

him.

whisper in his ear as he sat at the feast, to wake him with icy ɹngers

pale with terror, and the air seemed to him to have become

suddenly colder. Oh! in what a wild hour of madness he had killed

again. Each hideous detail came back to him with added horror. Out

of the black cave of Time, terrible and swathed in scarlet, rose the

image of his sin. When Lord Henry came in at six o’clock, he found

him crying as one whose heart will break.

It was not till the third day that he ventured to go out. There was

something in the clear, pine-scented air of that winter morning that

seemed to bring him back his joyousness and his ardour for life. But

Their strong passions must either bruise or bend. They either slay

the man, or themselves die. Shallow sorrows and shallow loves live

fears with something of pity and not a little of contempt.

After breakfast he walked with the Duchess for an hour in the

lake.

At the corner of the pine-wood he caught sight of Sir Geoʃrey

the mare home, made his way towards his guest through the

withered bracken and rough undergrowth.

‘Have you had good sport, Geoʃrey?’ he asked.

‘Not very good, Dorian. I think most of the birds have gone to

the open. I dare say it will be better after lunch, when we get to new

ground.’

Dorian strolled along by his side. The keen aromatic air, the

brown and red lights that glimmered in the wood, the hoarse cries

of the beaters ringing out from time to time, and the sharp snaps of

the guns that followed, fascinated him, and ɹlled him with a sense

of delightful freedom. He was dominated by the carelessness of

happiness, by the high indiʃerence of joy.

Gray, and he cried out at once, ‘Don’t shoot it, Geoʃrey. Let it live.’

‘What nonsense, Dorian!’ laughed his companion, and as the

agony, which is worse.

‘Good heavens! I have hit a beater!’ exclaimed Sir Geoʃrey.

there!’ he called out at the top of his voice. ‘A man is hurt.’

The head-keeper came running up with a stick in his hand.

‘Where, sir? Where is he?’ he shouted. At the same time the

ɹring ceased along the line.

‘Here,’ answered Sir Geoʃrey, angrily, hurrying towards the

thicket. ‘Why on earth don’t you keep your men back? Spoiled my

shooting for the day.’

Dorian watched them as they plunged into the alder-clump,

brushing the lithe, swinging branches aside. In a few moments they

emerged, dragging a body after them into the sunlight. He turned

away in horror. It seemed to him that misfortune followed wherever

he went. He heard Sir Geoʃrey ask if the man was really dead, and

the aɽrmative answer of the keeper. The wood seemed to him to

pheasant came beating through the boughs overhead.

After a few moments, that were to him, in his perturbed state,

started, and looked round.

‘Dorian,’ said Lord Henry, ‘I had better tell them that the

shooting is stopped for to-day. It would not look well to go on.’

‘I wish it were stopped for ever, Harry,’ he answered, bitterly.

‘The whole thing is hideous and cruel. Is the man…?’

He could not ɹnish the sentence.

‘I am afraid so,’ rejoined Lord Henry. ‘He got the whole charge of

shot in his chest. He must have died almost instantaneously. Come;

let us go home.’

They walked side by side in the direction of the avenue for

nearly ɹfty yards without speaking. Then Dorian looked at Lord

Henry, and said, with a heavy sigh, ‘It is a bad omen, Harry, a very

bad omen.’

‘What is?’ asked Lord Henry. ‘Oh! this accident, I suppose. My

dear fellow, it can’t be helped. It was the man’s own fault. Why did

he get in front of the guns? Besides, it is nothing to us. It is rather

awkward for Geoʃrey, of course. It does not do to pepper beaters. It

makes people think that one is a wild shot. And Geoʃrey is not; he

shoots very straight. But there is no use talking about the matter.’

pain.

ennui,1 Dorian. That is the one sin for which there is no forgiveness.

But we are not likely to suʃer from it, unless these fellows keep

chattering about this thing at dinner. I must tell them that the

subject is to be tabooed. As for omens, there is no such thing as an

omen. Destiny does not send us heralds. She is too wise or too cruel

for that. Besides, what on earth could happen to you, Dorian? You

have everything in the world that a man can want. There is no one

who would not be delighted to change places with you.’

‘There is no one with whom I would not change places, Harry.

Don’t laugh like that. I am telling you the truth. The wretched

peasant who has just died is better oʃ than I am. I have no terror of

Death. It is the coming of Death that terriɹes me. Its monstrous

wings seem to wheel in the leaden air around me. Good heavens!

don’t you see a man moving behind the trees there, watching me,

waiting for me?’

Lord Henry looked in the direction in which the trembling

gloved hand was pointing. ‘Yes,’ he said, smiling, ‘I see the gardener

waiting for you. I suppose he wants to ask you what ɻowers you

wish to have on the table to-night. How absurdly nervous you are,

back to town.’

Dorian heaved a sigh of relief as he saw the gardener

approaching. The man touched his hat, glanced for a moment at

answer,’ he murmured.

Dorian put the letter into his pocket. ‘Tell her Grace that I am

in the direction of the house.

‘How fond women are of doing dangerous things!’ laughed Lord

Henry. ‘It is one of the qualities in them that I admire most. A

woman will ɻirt with anybody in the world as long as other people

are looking on.’

‘How fond you are of saying dangerous things, Harry! In the

present instance you are quite astray. I like the Duchess very much,

but I don’t love her.’

‘And the Duchess loves you very much, but she likes you less, so

you are excellently matched.’

‘You are talking scandal, Harry, and there is never any basis for

scandal.’

‘The basis of every scandal is an immoral certainty,’ said Lord

Henry, lighting a cigarette.

‘You would sacriɹce anybody, Harry, for the sake of an epigram.’

‘The world goes to the altar of its own accord,’ was the answer.

‘I wish I could love,’ cried Dorian Gray, with a deep note of

pathos in his voice. ‘But I seem to have lost the passion, and

forgotten the desire. I am too much concentrated on myself. My own

away, to forget. It was silly of me to come down here at all. I think I

one is safe.’

‘Safe from what, Dorian? You are in some trouble. Why not tell

me what it is? You know I would help you.’

‘I can’t tell you, Harry,’ he answered, sadly. ‘And I dare say it is

only a fancy of mine. This unfortunate accident has upset me. I have

a horrible presentiment that something of the kind may happen to

me.’

‘What nonsense!’

‘I hope it is, but I can’t help feeling it. Ah! here is the Duchess,

looking like Artemis2 in a tailor-made gown. You see we have come

back, Duchess.’

‘I have heard all about it, Mr Gray,’ she answered. ‘Poor Geoʃrey

is terribly upset. And it seems that you asked him not to shoot the

hare. How curious!’

‘Yes, it was very curious. I don’t know what made me say it.

Some whim, I suppose. It looked the loveliest of little live things.

But I am sorry they told you about the man. It is a hideous subject.’

one who had committed a real murder.’

‘How horrid of you, Harry!’ cried the Duchess. ‘Isn’t it, Mr Gray?

Harry, Mr Gray is ill again. He is going to faint.’

Dorian drew himself up with an eʃort, and smiled. ‘It is nothing,

is all. I am afraid I walked too far this morning. I didn’t hear what

think I must go and lie down. You will excuse me, won’t you?’

They had reached the great ɻight of steps that led from the

Dorian, Lord Henry turned and looked at the Duchess with his

slumberous eyes. ‘Are you very much in love with him?’ he asked.

She did not answer for some time, but stood gazing at the

landscape. ‘I wish I knew,’ she said at last.

He shook his head. ‘Knowledge would be fatal. It is the

uncertainty that charms one. A mist makes things wonderful.’

‘One may lose one’s way.’

‘All ways end at the same point, my dear Gladys.’

‘What is that?’

‘Disillusion.’

‘It was my début in life,’ she sighed.

‘It came to you crowned.’

‘I am tired of strawberry leaves.’3

‘They become you.’

‘Only in public.’

‘You would miss them,’ said Lord Henry.

‘I will not part with a petal.’

‘Monmouth has ears.’

‘Old age is dull of hearing.’

‘Has he never been jealous?’

‘I wish he had been.’

He glanced about as if in search of something. ‘What are you

looking for?’ she inquired.

‘The button from your foil,’ he answered. ‘You have dropped it.’

She laughed. ‘I have still the mask.’

‘It makes your eyes lovelier,’ was his reply.

She laughed again. Her teeth showed like white seeds in a scarlet

fruit.

Upstairs, in his own room, Dorian Gray was lying on a sofa, with

terror in every tingling ɹbre of his body. Life had suddenly become

too hideous a burden for him to bear. The dreadful death of the

unlucky beater, shot in the thicket like a wild animal, had seemed to

what Lord Henry had said in a chance mood of cynical jesting.

spotted with blood.

Then he wrote a note to Lord Henry, telling him that he was

knock came to the door, and his valet informed him that the head-

he muttered, after some moments’ hesitation.

As soon as the man entered Dorian pulled his cheque-book out of

a drawer, and spread it out before him.

‘I suppose you have come about the unfortunate accident of this

morning, Thornton?’ he said, taking up a pen.

‘Yes, sir,’ answered the gamekeeper.

‘Was the poor fellow married? Had he any people dependent on

him?’ asked Dorian, looking bored. ‘If so, I should not like them to

be left in want, and will send them any sum of money you may

think necessary.’

‘We don’t know who he is, sir. That is what I took the liberty of

coming to you about.’

‘Don’t know who he is?’ said Dorian, listlessly. ‘What do you

mean? Wasn’t he one of your men?’

‘No, sir. Never saw him before. Seems like a sailor, sir.’

heart had suddenly stopped beating. ‘A sailor?’ he cried out. ‘Did

you say a sailor?’

‘Yes, sir. He looks as if he had been a sort of sailor; tattooed on

both arms, and that kind of thing.’

‘Was there anything found on him?’ said Dorian, leaning forward

and looking at the man with startled eyes. ‘Anything that would tell

his name?’

‘Some money, sir – not much, and a six-shooter. There was no

name of any kind. A decent-looking man, sir, but rough-like. A sort

of sailor we think.’

Dorian started to his feet. A terrible hope ɻuttered past him. He

clutched at it madly. ‘Where is the body?’ he exclaimed. ‘Quick! I

must see it at once.’

‘It is in an empty stable in the Home Farm, sir. The folk don’t

brings bad luck.’

‘The Home Farm! Go there at once and meet me. Tell one of the

grooms to bring my horse round. No. Never mind. I’ll go to the

stables myself. It will save time.’

In less than a quarter of an hour Dorian Gray was galloping

down the long avenue as hard as he could go. The trees seemed to

sweep past him in spectral procession, and wild shadows to ɻing

hoofs.

At last he reached the Home Farm. Two men were loitering in

door, and put his hand upon the latch.

There he paused for a moment, feeling that he was on the brink

of a discovery that would either make or mar his life. Then he thrust

the door open, and entered.

On a heap of sacking in the far corner was lying the dead body

spotted handkerchief had been placed over the face. A coarse

candle, stuck in a bottle, sputtered beside it.

Dorian Gray shuddered. He felt that his could not be the hand to

take the handkerchief away, and called out to one of the farm-

servants to come to him.

‘Take that thing oʃ the face. I wish to see it,’ he said, clutching

at the doorpost for support.

When the farm-servant had done so, he stepped forward. A cry of

joy broke from his lips. The man who had been shot in the thicket

was James Vane.

rode home, his eyes were full of tears, for he knew he was safe.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER XIX

‘There is no use your telling me that you are going to be good,’ cried

Lord Henry, dipping his white ɹngers into a red copper bowl ɹlled

with rose-water. ‘You are quite perfect. Pray, don’t change.’

Dorian Gray shook his head. ‘No, Harry, I have done too many

dreadful things in my life. I am not going to do any more. I began

my good actions yesterday.’

‘Where were you yesterday?’

‘In the country, Harry. I was staying at a little inn by myself.’

‘My dear boy,’ said Lord Henry, smiling, ‘anybody can be good in

the country. There are no temptations there. That is the reason why

people who live out of town are so absolutely uncivilized.

Civilization is not by any means an easy thing to attain to. There are

only two ways by which man can reach it. One is by being cultured,

the other by being corrupt. Country people have no opportunity of

being either, so they stagnate.’

‘Culture and corruption,’ echoed Dorian. ‘I have known

something of both. It seems terrible to me now that they should ever

be found together. For I have a new ideal, Harry. I am going to

alter. I think I have altered.’

‘You have not yet told me what your good action was. Or did

you say you had done more than one?’ asked his companion, as he

spilt into his plate a little crimson pyramid of seeded strawberries,

upon them.

‘I can tell you, Harry. It is not a story I could tell to any one else.

I spared somebody. It sounds vain, but you understand what I mean.

She was quite beautiful, and wonderfully like Sibyl Vane. I think

it was that which ɹrst attracted me to her. You remember Sibyl,

own class, of course. She was simply a girl in a village. But I really

apple-blossoms kept tumbling down on her hair, and she was

laughing. We were to have gone away together this morning at

dawn. Suddenly I determined to leave her as ɻower-like as I had

found her.’

‘I should think the novelty of the emotion must have given you a

thrill of real pleasure, Dorian,’ interrupted Lord Henry. ‘But I can

ɹnish your idyll for you. You gave her good advice, and broke her

heart. That was the beginning of your reformation.’

‘Harry, you are horrible! You mustn’t say these dreadful things.

Hetty’s heart is not broken. Of course she cried, and all that. But

there is no disgrace upon her. She can live, like Perdita, in her

garden of mint and marigold.’

‘And weep over a faithless Florizel,’ said Lord Henry, laughing,

as he leant back in his chair. ‘My dear Dorian, you have the most

contented now with any one of her own rank?1 I suppose she will be

married some day to a rough carter or a grinning ploughman. Well,

the fact of having met you, and loved you, will teach her to despise

her husband, and she will be wretched. From a moral point of view,

I cannot say that I think much of your great renunciation. Even as a

beginning, it is poor. Besides, how do you know that Hetty isn’t

ɻoating at the present moment in some star-lit mill-pond, with

lovely water-lilies round her, like Ophelia?’

‘I can’t bear this, Harry! You mock at everything, and then

suggest the most serious tragedies. I am sorry I told you now. I don’t

care what you say to me. I know I was right in acting as I did. Poor

Hetty! As I rode past the farm this morning, I saw her white face at

the window, like a spray of jasmine. Don’t let us talk about it any

more, and don’t try to persuade me that the ɹrst good action I have

done for years, the ɹrst little bit of self-sacriɹce I have ever known,

is really a sort of sin. I want to be better. I am going to be better.

Tell me something about yourself. What is going on in town? I have

not been to the club for days.’

‘The people are still discussing poor Basil’s disappearance.’

‘I should have thought they had got tired of that by this time,’

said Dorian, pouring himself out some wine, and frowning slightly.

‘My dear boy, they have only been talking about it for six weeks,

and the British public are really not equal to the mental strain of

having more than one topic every three months. They have been

Francisco. It must be a delightful city, and possess all the attractions

of the next world.’

‘What do you think has happened to Basil?’ asked Dorian,

was that he could discuss the matter so calmly.

‘I have not the slightest idea. If Basil chooses to hide himself, it is

no business of mine. If he is dead, I don’t want to think about him.

Death is the only thing that ever terriɹes me. I hate it.’

‘Why?’ said the younger man, wearily.

‘Because,’ said Lord Henry, passing beneath his nostrils the gilt

trellis of an open vinaigrette box, ‘one can survive everything

nowadays except that. Death and vulgarity are the only two facts in

our coʃee in the music-room, Dorian. You must play Chopin to me.

The man with whom my wife ran away played Chopin exquisitely.

without her. Of course married life is merely a habit, a bad habit.

regrets them the most. They are an essential part of one’s

personality.’

Dorian said nothing, but rose from the table, and, passing into

‘Harry, did it ever occur to you that Basil was murdered?’

Lord Henry yawned. ‘Basil was very popular, and always wore a

Waterbury watch.2 Why should he have been murdered? He was not

clever enough to have enemies. Of course he had a wonderful genius

for painting. But a man can paint like Velasquez and yet be as dull

as possible. Basil was really rather dull. He only interested me once,

and that was when he told me, years ago, that he had a wild

adoration for you, and that you were the dominant motive of his

art.’

‘I was very fond of Basil,’ said Dorian, with a note of sadness in

his voice. ‘But don’t people say that he was murdered?’

‘Oh, some of the papers do. It does not seem to me to be at all

probable. I know there are dreadful places in Paris, but Basil was

not the sort of man to have gone to them. He had no curiosity. It

was his chief defect.’

‘What would you say, Harry, if I told you that I had murdered

Basil?’ said the younger man. He watched him intently after he had

spoken.

‘I would say, my dear fellow, that you were posing for a

is to us, simply a method of procuring extraordinary sensations.’3

‘A method of procuring sensations? Do you think, then, that a

man who has once committed a murder could possibly do the same

crime again? Don’t tell me that.’

‘Oh! anything becomes a pleasure if one does it too often,’ cried

Lord Henry, laughing. ‘That is one of the most important secrets of

life. I should fancy, however, that murder is always a mistake. One

should never do anything that one cannot talk about after dinner.

come to such a really romantic end as you suggest; but I can’t. I dare

say he fell into the Seine oʃ an omnibus, and that the conductor

hushed up the scandal. Yes: I should fancy that was his end. I see

him lying now on his back under those dull-green waters with the

heavy barges ɻoating over him, and long weeds catching in his hair.

Do you know, I don’t think he would have done much more good

work. During the last ten years his painting had gone oʃ very

much.’

Dorian heaved a sigh, and Lord Henry strolled across the room

and began to stroke the head of a curious Java parrot, a large grey-

to sway backwards and forwards.

separated you? I suppose he bored you. If so, he never forgave you.

It’s a habit bores have. By the way, what has become of that

on the way. You never got it back? What a pity! It was really a

belonged to Basil’s best period. Since then, his work was that

curious mixture of bad painting and good intentions that always

advertise for it? You should.’

‘I forget,’ said Dorian. ‘I suppose I did. But I never really liked it.

I am sorry I sat for it. The memory of the thing is hateful to me.

Why do you talk of it? It used to remind me of those curious lines in

some play – Hamlet, I think – how do they run? –

                                  Like the painting of a sorrow, 

A face without a heart.4

Yes: that is what it was like.’

Lord Henry laughed. ‘If a man treats life artistically, his brain is

his heart,’ he answered, sinking into an arm-chair. Dorian Gray

shook his head, and struck some soft chords on the piano. ‘‘‘Like the

painting of a sorrow,’’’ he repeated, ‘‘‘a face without a heart.’’ ’

The elder man lay back and looked at him with half-closed eyes.

man if he gain the whole world and lose – how does the quotation

run? – his own soul’’?’

The music jarred and Dorian Gray started, and stared at his

friend. ‘Why do you ask me that, Harry?’

‘My dear fellow,’ said Lord Henry, elevating his eyebrows in

me an answer. That is all. I was going through the Park last Sunday,

and close by the Marble Arch there stood a little crowd of shabby-

looking people listening to some vulgar street-preacher.5 As I passed

by, I heard the man yelling out that question to his audience. It

struck me as being rather dramatic. London is very rich in curious

eʃects of that kind. A wet Sunday, an uncouth Christian in a

mackintosh, a ring of sickly white faces under a broken roof of

dripping umbrellas, and a wonderful phrase ɻung into the air by

shrill, hysterical lips – it was really very good in its way, quite a

suggestion. I thought of telling the prophet that Art had a soul, but

that man had not. I am afraid, however, he would not have

understood me.’

‘Don’t, Harry. The soul is a terrible reality. It can be bought, and

is a soul in each one of us. I know it.’

‘Do you feel quite sure of that, Dorian?’

‘Quite sure.’

‘Ah! then it must be an illusion. The things one feels absolutely

certain about are never true. That is the fatality of Faith, and the

lesson of Romance. How grave you are! Don’t be so serious. What

have you or I to do with the superstitions of our age? No: we have

given up our belief in the soul. Play me something. Play me a

nocturne, Dorian, and, as you play, tell me, in a low voice, how you

have kept your youth. You must have some secret. I am only ten

years older than you are, and I am wrinkled, and worn, and yellow.

You are really wonderful, Dorian. You have never looked more

charming than you do to-night. You remind me of the day I saw you

ɹrst. You were rather cheeky, very shy, and absolutely

extraordinary. You have changed, of course, but not in appearance. I

wish you would tell me your secret. To get back my youth I would

do anything in the world, except take exercise, get up early, or be

respectable. Youth! There is nothing like it. It’s absurd to talk of the

ignorance of youth. The only people to whose opinions I listen now

with any respect are people much younger than myself. They seem

in front of me. Life has revealed to them her latest wonder. As for

the aged, I always contradict the aged. I do it on principle. If you

ask them their opinion on something that happened yesterday, they

young Apollo, and that I am Marsyas6 listening to you. I have

sorrows, Dorian, of my own, that even you know nothing of. The

tragedy of old age is not that one is old, but that one is young. I am

amazed sometimes at my own sincerity. Ah, Dorian, how happy you

are! What an exquisite life you have had!7 You have drunk deeply of

everything. You have crushed the grapes against your palate.8

Nothing has been hidden from you. And it has all been to you no

more than the sound of music. It has not marred you. You are still

the same.’

‘I am not the same, Harry.’

‘Yes: you are the same. I wonder what the rest of your life will

be. Don’t spoil it by renunciations. At present you are a perfect type.

Don’t make yourself incomplete. You are quite ɻawless now. You

need not shake your head: you know you are. Besides, Dorian, don’t

deceive yourself. Life is not governed by will or intention. Life is a

question of nerves, and ɹbres, and slowly built-up cells in which

thought hides itself and passion has its dreams. You may fancy

yourself safe, and think yourself strong. But a chance tone of colour

always will worship you. You are the type of what the age is

your art. You have set yourself to music. Your days are your

sonnets.’

Dorian rose up from the piano, and passed his hand through his

hair. ‘Yes, life has been exquisite,’ he murmured, ‘but I am not going

to have the same life, Harry. And you must not say these

extravagant things to me. You don’t know everything about me. I

think that if you did, even you would turn from me. You laugh.

Don’t laugh.’

‘Why have you stopped playing, Dorian? Go back and give me

the nocturne over again. Look at that great honey-coloured moon

that hangs in the dusky air. She is waiting for you to charm her, and

to you. He is quite delightful, and rather reminds me of you.’

‘I hope not,’ said Dorian, with a sad look in his eyes. ‘But I am

tired to-night, Harry. I sha’n’t go to the club. It is nearly eleven, and

I want to go to bed early.’

‘Do stay. You have never played so well as to-night. There was

than I had ever heard from it before.’

‘It is because I am going to be good,’ he answered, smiling. ‘I am

a little changed already.’

‘You cannot change to me, Dorian,’ said Lord Henry. ‘You and I

will always be friends.’

‘Yet you poisoned me with a book once. I should not forgive

that. Harry, promise me that you will never lend that book to any

one. It does harm.’

‘My dear boy, you are really beginning to moralize. You will

soon be going about like the converted, and the revivalist, warning

much too delightful to do that. Besides, it is no use. You and I are

what we are, and will be what we will be. As for being poisoned by

a book, there is no such thing as that.9 Art has no inɻuence upon

round to-morrow. I am going to ride at eleven. We might go

together, and I will take you to lunch afterwards with Lady

eleven.’

‘Must I really come, Harry?’

‘Certainly. The Park is quite lovely now. I don’t think there have

been such lilacs since the year I met you.’

‘Very well. I shall be here at eleven,’ said Dorian. ‘Good-night,

had something more to say. Then he sighed and went out.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER XX

It was a lovely night, so warm that he threw his coat over his arm,

and did not even put his silk scarf round his throat. As he strolled

home, smoking his cigarette, two young men in evening dress

passed him. He heard one of them whisper to the other, ‘That is

Dorian Gray.’ He remembered how pleased he used to be when he

was pointed out, or stared at, or talked about. He was tired of

hearing his own name now. Half the charm of the little village

where he had been so often lately was that no one knew who he

was. He had often told the girl whom he had lured to love him that

he was poor, and she had believed him. He had told her once that

he was wicked, and she had laughed at him, and answered that

wicked people were always very old and very ugly. What a laugh

she had! –just like a thrush singing. And how pretty she had been in

her cotton dresses and her large hats! She knew nothing, but she

had everything that he had lost.

When he reached home, he found his servant waiting up for him.

He sent him to bed, and threw himself down on the sofa in the

library, and began to think over some of the things that Lord Henry

had said to him.

Was it really true that one could never change? He felt a wild

longing for the unstained purity of his boyhood – his rose-white

boyhood, as Lord Henry had once called it. He knew that he had

tarnished himself, ɹlled his mind with corruption and given horror

no hope for him?1

Ah! in what a monstrous moment of pride and passion he had

prayed that the portrait should bear the burden of his days, and he

keep the unsullied splendour of eternal youth! All his failure had

been due to that. Better for him that each sin of his life had brought

its sure, swift penalty along with it. There was puriɹcation in

punishment. Not ‘Forgive us our sins’ but ‘Smite us for our

iniquities’ should be the prayer of man to a most just God.

The curiously-carved mirror that Lord Henry had given to him,

so many years ago now, was standing on the table, and the white-

limbed Cupids laughed round as of old. He took it up, as he had

done on that night of horror, when he had ɹrst noted the change in

the fatal picture, and with wild tear-dimmed eyes looked into its

polished shield. Once, some one who had terribly loved him, had

written to him a mad letter, ending with these idolatrous words:

‘The world is changed because you are made of ivory and gold. The

curves of your lips rewrite history.’ The phrases came back to his

memory, and he repeated them over and over to himself. Then he

loathed his own beauty, and ɻinging the mirror on the ɻoor crushed

it into silver splinters beneath his heel. It was his beauty that had

ruined him, his beauty and the youth that he had prayed for. But for

spoiled him.

It was better not to think of the past. Nothing could alter that. It

revealed the secret that he had been forced to know. The

excitement, such as it was, over Basil Hallward’s disappearance

most upon his mind. It was the living death of his own soul that

troubled him. Basil had painted the portrait that had marred his life.

He could not forgive him that. It was the portrait that had done

everything. Basil had said things to him that were unbearable, and

that he had yet borne with patience.

The murder had been simply the madness of a moment. As for

do it. It was nothing to him.

A new life! That was what he wanted. That was what he was

waiting for. Surely he had begun it already. He had spared one

innocent thing, at any rate. He would never again tempt innocence.

He would be good.

As he thought of Hetty Merton, he began to wonder if the

signs of evil had already gone away. He would go and look.

He took the lamp from the table and crept upstairs. As he

looking face and lingered for a moment about his lips. Yes, he

would be good, and the hideous thing that he had hidden away

lifted from him already.

He went in quietly, locking the door behind him, as was his

custom, and dragged the purple hanging from the portrait. A cry of

more loathsome, if possible, than before – and the scarlet dew that

spotted the hand seemed brighter, and more like blood newly spilt.

Then he trembled. Had it been merely vanity that had made him do

his one good deed? Or the desire for a new sensation, as Lord Henry

that sometimes makes us do things ɹner than we are ourselves? Or,

been? It seemed to have crept like a horrible disease over the

There was no trace of the murdered man anywhere. Everything

to earth as well as to heaven. Nothing that he could do would

was thinking of Hetty Merton. For it was an unjust mirror, this

mirror of his soul that he was looking at. Vanity? Curiosity?

Hypocrisy? Had there been nothing more in his renunciation than

that? There had been something more. At least he thought so. But

who could tell?… No. There had been nothing more. Through

vanity he had spared her. In hypocrisy he had worn the mask of

goodness. For curiosity’s sake he had tried the denial of self. He

recognized that now.2

But this murder – was it to dog him all his life? Was he always to

be burdened by his past? Was he really to confess? Never. There was

only one bit of evidence left against him. The picture itself– that was

had given him pleasure to watch it changing and growing old. Of

destroy it.

He looked round, and saw the knife that had stabbed Basil

Hallward. He had cleaned it many times, till there was no stain left

upon it. It was bright, and glistened. As it had killed the painter, so

this monstrous soul-life, and without its hideous warnings, he would

be at peace.3 He seized the thing, and stabbed the picture with it.

There was a cry heard, and a crash. The cry was so horrible in its

agony that the frightened servants woke, and crept out of their

rooms. Two gentlemen, who were passing in the Square below,

stopped, and looked up at the great house. They walked on till they

met a policeman, and brought him back. The man rang the bell

several times, but there was no answer. Except for a light in one of

the top windows, the house was all dark. After a time, he went

away, and stood in an adjoining portico and watched.

‘Whose house is that, constable?’ asked the elder of the two

gentlemen.

‘Mr Dorian Gray’s, sir,’ answered the policeman.

One of them was Sir Henry Ashton’s uncle.

Inside, in the servants’ part of the house, the half-clad domestics

were talking in low whispers to each other. Old Mrs Leaf was

crying, and wringing her hands. Francis was as pale as death.

After about a quarter of an hour, he got the coachman and one

of the footmen and crept upstairs. They knocked, but there was no

to the balcony. The windows yielded easily: their bolts were old.

When they entered, they found hanging upon the wall a splendid

portrait of their master as they had last seen him, in all the wonder

man, in evening dress, with a knife in his heart. He was withered,

wrinkled, and loathsome of visage. It was not till they had examined

the rings that they recognized who it was.

OceanofPDF.com

APPENDIX 1: 
 
Selected Contemporary Reviews of The
Picture of Dorian Gray 
 

FROM THE ST JAMES’S GAZETTE, JUNE 1890

more adventurous, we tried to read it; time is when we had

forgotten him, or only remember him as the late editor of The

Woman’s World1 – a part for which he was singularly unɹtted, if we

are to judge him by the work which he has been allowed to publish

in Lippincott’s Magazine and which Messrs Ward, Lock & Co. have

not been ashamed to circulate in Great Britain. Not being curious in

ordure, and not wishing to oʃend the nostrils of decent persons, we

do not propose to analyse ‘The Picture of Dorian Gray’: that would

be to advertise the developments of an esoteric prurience. Whether

the Treasury or the Vigilance Society will think it worth while to

prosecute Mr Oscar Wilde or Messrs Ward, Lock & Co., we do not

know; but on the whole we hope they will not.

The puzzle is that a young man of decent parts, who enjoyed

(when he was at Oxford) the opportunity of associating with

grammar is better than Ouida’s;2 the erudition equal; but in every

other respect we prefer the talented lady who broke oʃ with ‘pious

aposiopesis’ when she touched upon ‘the horrors which are

described in the pages of Suetonius and Livy’… not to mention the

yet worse infamies believed by many scholars to be accurately

portrayed in the lost works of Plutarch, Venus, and Nicodemus,

especially Nicodemus.

Let us take one peep at the young men in Mr Oscar Wilde’s story.

Puppy3 No. 1 is the painter of the picture of Dorian Gray; Puppy No.

2 is the critic (a courtesy lord, skilled in all the knowledge of the

Egyptians and aweary of all the sins and pleasures of London);

Puppy No. 3 is the original, cultivated by Puppy No. 1 with a

‘romantic friendship’. The Puppies fall a-talking: Puppy No. 1 about

his Art, Puppy No. 2 about his sins and pleasures and the pleasures

of sin, and Puppy No. 3 about himself – always about himself, and

generally about his face, which is ‘brainless and beautiful’. The

Puppies appear to ɹll up the intervals of talk by plucking daisies and

playing with them, and sometimes by drinking ‘something with

strawberry in it’. The youngest Puppy is told that he is charming;

Blase Puppy at their ɹrst meeting:

‘Yes, Mr Gray, the gods have been good to you. But what the

gods give they quickly take away…. When your youth goes, your

hollow-cheeked, and dull-eyed. You will suʃer horribly.’

Why, bless our souls! haven’t we read something of this kind

somewhere in the classics? Yes, of course we have! But in what

have probably occupied their time in lapping ‘something with

No. 3(the Doll Puppy) how much he admires him. What is the

answer? ‘I am less to you than your ivory Hermes or your silver

have my ɹrst wrinkle, I suppose. I know now that when one loses

picture could only change, and I could be always what I am now!’

vicious men. He ɹnishes with murder: the New Voluptuousness

gore and gashes wherein Mr Rider Haggard4 takes a chaste delight

are the natural diet for a cultivated palate which is tired of mere

licentiousness. And every wickedness or ɹlthiness committed by

Dorian Gray is faithfully registered upon his face in the picture; but

his living features are undisturbed and unmarred by his inward

vileness. This is the story which Mr Oscar Wilde has tried to tell; a

very lame story it is, and very lamely it is told.

Why has he told it? There are two explanations; and, so far as we

can see, not more than two. Not to give pleasure to his readers: the

thing is too clumsy, too tedious, and – alas! that we should say it –

too stupid. Perhaps it was to shock his readers, in order that they

might cry Fie! upon him and talk about him, much as Mr Grant

Allen5 recently tried in The Universal Review to arouse, by a

licentious theory of the sexual relations, an attention which is

refused to his popular chatter about other men’s science. Are we

then to suppose that Mr Oscar Wilde has yielded to the craving for a

in fact, two branches from the same root, a root which draws its life

from malodorous putrefaction. One development is found in the

Mr Stead’s famous outbursts.6 That is odious enough and

mischievous enough, and it is rightly execrated, because it is tainted

with an hypocrisy and the less culpable because charitable persons

may believe it to be unconscious. But is it more odious or more

mischievous than the ‘frank Paganism’ (that is the word, is it not?)

which delights in dirtiness and confesses its delight? Still they are

both chips from the same block – ‘The Maiden Tribute of Modern

Babylon’ and ‘The Picture of Dorian Gray’ – and both of them ought

to be chucked into the ɹre. Not so much because they are dangerous

and corrupt (they are corrupt but not dangerous) as because they

are incurably silly, written by simpleton poseurs (whether they call

themselves Puritan or Pagan) who know nothing about the life

which they aʃect to have explored, and because they are mere

catchpenny revelations of the non-existent, which, if they reveal

minds from which they emerge.

FROM THE DAILY CHRONICLE, SHORTLY AFTER

THE PUBLICATION OF DORIAN GRAY IN 

LIPPINCOTT’S MAGAZINE

Dulness and dirt are the chief features of Lippincott’s this month. The

element in it that is unclean, though undeniably amusing, is furnished by

Mr Oscar Wilde’s story of ‘The Picture of Dorian Gray’. It is a tale

spawned from the leprous literature of the French Décadents – a

poisonous book, the atmosphere of which is heavy with the

mephitic odours of moral and spiritual putrefaction – a gloating

study of the mental and physical corruption of a fresh, fair and

golden youth, which might be horrible and fascinating but for its

eʃeminate frivolity, its studied insincerity, its theatrical cynicism,

its tawdry mysticism, its ɻippant philosophisings, and the

contaminating trail of garish vulgarity which is over all Mr Wilde’s

elaborate Wardour Street aestheticism and obtrusively cheap

scholarship.

Mr Wilde says his book has ‘a moral’. The ‘moral’, so far as we

can collect it, is that man’s chief end is to develop his nature to the

fullest by ‘always searching for new sensations’, that when the soul

gets sick the way to cure it is to deny the senses nothing, for

‘nothing’, says one of Mr Wilde’s characters, Lord Henry Wotton,

civilization, art, and religion have developed throughout the ages as

‘moral’ for the book at the end is, artistically speaking, coarse and

every resource of luxury and art, and sometimes still more piquant

to the jaded young man of fashion, whose lives ‘Dorian Gray’

pretends to sketch, by every abomination of vulgarity and squalor is

– what? Why, that it will leave traces of premature age and

loathsome sensualness on his pretty face, rosy with the loveliness

that endeared youth of his odious type to the paralytic patricians of

the Lower Empire.

Dorian Gray prays that a portrait of himself which an artist, who

raves about him as young men do about the women they love not

wisely but too well, has painted may grow old instead of the

original. This is what happens by some supernatural agency, the

logically enough by Mr Wilde’s ‘New Hedonism’.

Then Mr Wilde ɹnishes his story by saying that on hearing a

the book is a sham, except the one element in the book which will

taint every young mind that comes in contact with it. That element

is shockingly real, and it is the plausibly insinuated defence of the

creed that appeals to the senses ‘to cure the soul’ whenever the

spiritual nature of man suʃers from too much purity and self-denial.

The rest of this number of Lippincott consists of articles of

harmless padding.

FROM THE SCOTS OBSERVER, 5 JULY 1890

Why go grubbing in muck heaps? The world is fair, and the

proportion of healthy-minded men and honest women to those that

are foul, fallen, or unnatural is great. Mr Oscar Wilde has again been

writing stuʃ that were better unwritten; and while ‘The Picture of

Dorian Gray’, which he contributes to Lippincott’s, is ingenious,

interesting, full of cleverness, and plainly the work of a man of

letters, it is false art – for its interest is medico-legal; it is false to

human nature – for its hero is a devil; it is false to morality – for it is

not made suɽciently clear that the writer does not prefer a course

of unnatural iniquity to a life of cleanliness, health, and sanity. The

story – which deals with matters only ɹtted for the Criminal

alike to author and editor. Mr Wilde has brains, and art, and style;

but if he can write for none but outlawed noblemen and perverted

telegraph-boys,7 the sooner he takes to tailoring (or some other

decent trade) the better for his own reputation and the public

morals.

FROM THE CHRISTIAN LEADER LATER THE 

SCOTTISH REVIEW, 3 JULY 189O

Mr Oscar Wilde furnished us some time ago with a pleasant surprise

by the production of the cleverest book of fairy tales that has been

issued in his generation from the British press; and to this month’s

subtle power it portrays the gilded paganism which has been

literary charm of even its most powerful passages is of small account

that it will be read and pondered by those classes of British society

whose corruption it delineates with such thrilling power, and that it

may be the means of preserving many young lives from the

temptations by which they are surrounded. One of its most

impressive lessons lies in the fact that Dorian Gray’s life was

hundred pages, and would be cheap at the price charged for the

number, there are nearly sixty pages more ɹlled with excellent

matter in prose and verse.

FROM THE CHRISTIAN WORLD, 10 JULY 1890

declares that the story must be considered simply as a work of art.

Taking it on this lower level, then, we need only say that the story is

Oscar Wilde do not approach the genius of R. L. Stevenson.

WALTER PATER IN THE BOOKMAN (OCTOBER 1891), 

ON THE 1891 VERSION

A Novel by Mr Oscar Wilde

There is always something of an excellent talker about the writing

of Mr Oscar Wilde; and in his hands, as happens so rarely with those

who practise it, the form of dialogue is justiɹed by its being really

alive. His genial, laughter-loving sense of life and its enjoyable

valuable truths of criticism. Conversational case, the ɻuidity of life,

has enounced as critic concerning it.

A wholesome dislike of the commonplace, rightly or wrongly

habits and tastes – leads him to protest emphatically against so-

called ‘realism’ in art; life, as he argues, with much plausibility, as a

matter of fact, when it is really awake, following art – the fashion an

eʃective artist sets; while art, on the other hand, inɻuential and

eʃective art, has never taken its cue from actual life. In ‘Dorian

Gray’ he is true certainly, on the whole, to the aesthetic philosophy

of his ‘Intentions’; yet not infallibly, even on this point: there is a

certain amount of the intrusion of real life and its sordid aspects –

the low theatre, the pleasures and griefs, the faces of some very

unreɹned people, managed, of course, cleverly enough. The

interlude of Jim Vane, his half-sullen but wholly faithful care for his

can see why. A true Epicureanism aims at a complete though

moral sense therefore, for instance, the sense of sin and

speedily, as completely as they can, is to lose, or lower,

lower degree of development. As a story, however, a partly

Epicurean niceties only adding to the decorative colour of its central

the 
perpetual, 
epigrammatic, 
surprising, 
yet 
so 
natural,

accessory detail, taken straight from the culture, the intellectual and

social interests, the conventionalities, of the moment, have, in fact,

after all, the eʃect of the better sort of realism, throwing into relief

the adroitly-devised supernatural element after the manner of Poe,

but with a grace he never reached, which supersedes that earlier

didactic purpose, and makes the quite suɽcing interest of an

excellent story.

and strange, we might say that Lord Henry, and even more the,

memories, and subsequent hopes, which Hallward, by a really

in fairness, that the writer is impersonal: seems not to have

identiɹed himself entirely with any of his characters: and Wotton’s

cynicism, or whatever it be, atleast makes a very clever story

possible. He becomes the spoiler of the fair young man, whose

bodily form remains un-aged: while his picture, the chef d’?uvre of

the artist Hallward, changes miraculously with the gradual

corruption of his soul. How true, what a light on the artistic nature,

is the following on actual personalities and their revealing inɻuence

in art. We quote it as an example of Mr Wilde’s more serious style.

I sometimes think that there are only two eras of any importance in the world’s

history. The ɹrst is the appearance of a new medium for art, and the second is the

appearance of a new personality for art also. What the invention of oil-painting was to

the Venetians, the face of Antinou¨s was to late Greek sculpture, and the face of Dorian

Gray will some day be to me. It is not merely that I paint from him, draw from him,

sketch from him. Of course I have done all that. But he is much more to me than a

model or a sitter. I won’t tell you that I am dissatisɹed with what I have done of him,

or that his beauty is such that Art cannot express it. There is nothing that Art cannot

express, and I know that the work I have done, since I met Dorian Gray, is good work,

is the best work of my life. But in some curious way… his personality has suggested to

me an entirely new manner in art, an entirely new mode of style. I see things

diʃerently, I think of them diʃerently. I can now recreate life in a way that was

hidden from me before.

Dorian himself, though certainly a quite unsuccessful experiment

in Epicureanism, in life as a ɹne art, is (till his inward spoiling takes

beautiful creation. But his story is also a vivid, though carefully

moral pushed home, to the eʃect that vice and crime make people

coarse and ugly. General readers, nevertheless, will probably care

less for this moral, less for the ɹne, varied, largely appreciative

culture of the writer, in evidence from page to page, than for the

story itself, with its adroitly managed supernatural incidents, its

almost 
equally 
wonderful 
applications 
of 
natural 
science;

inherent experience or fancy of the human brain, of a double life: of

mouth, with which the consciousness of the supernatural is

mercilessly. The special fascination of the piece is, of course, just

go with that of Edgar Poe, and with some good French work of the

same kind, done, probably, in more or less conscious imitation of it.

Walter Pater

NOTES

1 The Woman’s World: Wilde became editor of what was then called

Lady’s World: A Magazine of Fashion and Society, published by Cassell

& Co. in 1887. He urged Cassell’s to change its name to Woman’s

World, and the ɹrst number under Wilde’s editorship appeared in

November that year. He acted in this capacity for two years.

2 Ouida: The nom deplume of Marie Louise de la Ramee (1839–

1908), an extremely successful novelist in her day, now almost

completely forgotten.

3 Puppy: arrogant and conceited young man (OED).

4 Rider Haggard: Henry Rider Haggard (1856–1925), author of very

popular escapist romances, the most famous being King Solomon’s

Mines (1885), She (1887) and Allan Quartermain (1887). He was

knighted in 1912.

5 Grant Allen: Grant Allen (1848–99), campaigning novelist, whose

most famous work The Woman Who Did (1895) was a notorious

example of the ‘New Women’ novel, which depicted emancipated

women who defy moral and social expectations.

6 Mr Stead’s famous outbursts: W. T. Stead was the editor of the Pall

Mall Gazette, which shocked the public when it published an article

entitled ‘The Maiden Tribute of Modern Babylon’ (6–10 July 1885),

exposing the trade in virgins that existed in the capital. Stead had

posed as a customer at a house of ill-repute and published a lurid

account of his experience of ‘buying’ a young working-class girl. His

publications, which mixed prurient reportage with righteously

indignant campaigning, did bring about the awareness he sought,

and contributed to the pressure on Parliament to raise the law of

consent from thirteen years to sixteen. There is some irony in the

fact that Wilde and Stead are being compared here, as it was the

Amendment to this law (1885) which convicted Wilde in 1895.

7 outlawed noblemen and perverse telegraph-boys: A reference to the

Cleveland Street aʃair, when in September 1889 it was revealed

to be understood by most of the readership of the Scots Observer.

OceanofPDF.com

APPENDIX 2: 
 
Introduction to the First Penguin Classics
Edition, by Peter Ackroyd

The composition of The Picture of Dorian Gray was determined, like

so many of the events in Oscar Wilde’s life, by chance: Wilde and

Arthur Conan Doyle were dining with an American publisher, J. M.

Stoddart, and during the course of this dinner Stoddart

commissioned both of them to write for Lippincott’s 
Monthly

Magazine. Conan Doyle has taken up the story:

Wilde’s contribution was The Picture of Dorian Gray, a book which is surely upon a high

moral plane, while I wrote The Sign of Four.

As soon as he received the commission Wilde wrote swiftly – the

sad history of Dorian Gray was no doubt one he carried in his head

– and the story appeared in the July 1890 issue of Lippincott’s.

Although Conan Doyle may have considered Dorian Gray to be a

‘high moral plane’, his opinion was not shared by the ɹrst reviewers

who condemned the work for its speculative treatment of immoral

or at least uncomfortable subjects. Charles Whibley, in the Scots

Observer, declared that ‘Mr Oscar Wilde has again been writing stuʃ

that were better unwritten’ (the ‘again’ refers to Wilde’s earlier essay

on Shakespeare’s admiration for a boy actor, The Portrait of Mr W.H.

); and he went on,‘… he can write for none but outlawed noblemen

and perverted telegraph-boys’. This was an unambiguous reference

to a homosexual scandal of 1889, which had compromised both

frequented a male brothel in Cleveland Street.

Wilde made a spirited reply to this and to other damaging

attacks, and in the month of its publication declared to an

real work of art with a strong ethical lesson inherent in it’. To Conan

Doyle himself he wrote, ‘I cannot understand how they can treat

planned for the following year, and he took care not only to add

chapters which are of a more conventional Victorian nature

(speciɹcally the sub-plot concerning the putative revenge of James

Vane upon Dorian Gray) but also to give a less ‘purple’ tone to those

possible that he had written the ɹrst version too quickly, or with the

thoughtlessness of inspiration, and did not realize that it was as self-

revealing as it now seemed to be; but, despite the changes he made,

in Wilde’s long descent into open scandal and eventual infamy.

The point was that Dorian Gray presented in oblique form an

time, and there are some critics who believe the book to represent

Wilde’s need for confession if not expiation. His adolescence had

been in certain respects a conventional one, but his years after

meant that there were occasions when he was snubbed in public

atmosphere of scandal which ɹlls its last chapters.

But there were certain other parallels with Wilde’s own life

which made the book’s reception peculiarly important to him. When

he was at Oxford he became a close friend of Frank Miles, a painter,

and through Miles he met the homosexual aesthete Lord Ronald

in Dorian Gray by Basil Hallward and Lord Henry Wotton, just as the

philosophies of Pater and of Ruskin (whom Wilde had also met at

Oxford) animate the more theoretical disquisitions in the novel.

There is much here, also, that might act as an emblem of Wilde’s

own emotional life – not just in the note of mystery and secrecy

moments.

Oscar Wilde was also an intensely superstitious man – although

it cannot be said that his numerous visits to palmists and to fortune-

from the beginning invaded by the idea of fatality and doom. The

tone is introduced very early, in some of Basil Hallward’s ɹrst words

to Lord Henry Wotton: ‘… we shall all suʃer for what the gods have

given us, suʃer terribly’. And it was when Wilde himself was

suʃering in just such a manner, while locked up in a cell within the

conɹnes of Reading gaol, that he returned to this theme and

meditated upon its annunciation in the novel which he had

‘that like a purple thread runs through the gold cloth of Dorian

Gray.’ In the novel itself there are strange anticipations of Wilde’s

own eventual fate:

Here, one should never make one’s début with a scandal. One should reserve that to give

an interest to one’s old age.

which Wilde also remembered in his prison cell:

I say, in Dorian Gray somewhere, that ‘a man cannot be too careful in the choice of his

enemies’…

And it might be pointed out that, on their second meeting in July

1891, Wilde gave a copy of this book to Lord Alfred Douglas, the

young man who in so many ways is preɹgured in the character of

Dorian Gray and who would be the catalyst of Wilde’s ill-fortune.

Never has a novel been surrounded by so many portents.

And never has a novel so marked out its author. Before its

publication Wilde was perhaps best known for his fairy stories – The

Happy Prince and Other Tales had been published in 1888 – and for

his contributions to aesthetic criticism – The Decay of Lying was

published in 1889. Of course his youthful pose as an aesthete had

earned him a temporary notoriety, but after Dorian Gray everything

changed and, as Philippe Jullian has remarked, ‘the name of Wilde

became a synonym for all that was most unhealthy’. There was one

sense in which this was inevitable for, by introducing the painted

portrait of Dorian Gray as an emblem of sin, he was also putting his

ɹnger on a peculiar Victorian complex which was associated with

the idea of sexual guilt: as Owen Burdett has suggested, in the late

nineteenth century ‘art and scandal came to be associated, and the

imaginative life began to take vice for its province’.

It was not just a question of ‘scandal’, however, since in this

novel Wilde had eʃectively challenged English society on a number

Bailey.

It would be wrong to suggest, however, that the contemporary

described it as a ‘wonderful book’ and Walter Pater characterized it

fatally compromised by the Victorian ethic found much in Dorian

Gray to admire and to praise. It is signiɹcant, in this context, that

the reviews in America were much more favourable. Wilde himself

speaks of it in the fondest terms in De Profundis and, after his release

Gray is a classic, and deservedly.’

although it would be diɽcult to oʃer more than a tentative

to be an extrapolation from À Rebours: ‘It is’, he told one

other books, in too deterministic a manner. As he said in an

interview in 1895:

Setting aside the prose and poetry of the Greek and Latin

authors, the only writers who have inɻuenced me are Keats,

Flaubert, and Walter Pater; and before I came across them I had

already gone more than half-way to meet them.

It will be noted that two out of the three authors mentioned here

are English, and so it was perhaps slightly over-enthusiastic of

Arthur Ransome to assert of Dorian Gray that it is ‘the ɹrst French

novel to be written in the English language’.

Certainly its emphasis upon strange sins, and its somewhat

uninventive borrowings from Huysmans in such matters as the

which Wilde himself was prone to mock; they might even have

Idiot Boy or Dumb but Innocent. Our fathers used to like that sort of

piece, I believe.’ It is a mark of Wilde’s most complicated

temperament that he was able to parody the faults from which he

himself was not immune – magniloquence of a sentimental kind

being one of them.

But that is not the sum of his achievement in this book and, in a

work which is striated with images of duality and the double life, it

is not surprising that Dorian Gray should be composed in two

outrageous epigram. This is of course a distinctive feature of Wilde’s

work – in his earliest drama, Vera, the epigrams are given to the

aristocrats and the melodrama is lavished upon the revolutionaries –

but it reaches its most elaborate form here. Dorian Gray in fact

stands at the pivotal point of Wilde’s writing: both the aesthetic

discussions and the theatrical plot look back to his earlier essays and

Dorian Gray. And it could be said that, just as the novel’s publication

composition of his major works.

But Dorian Gray is ɹlled with more troubled intimations and it is

the oscillation between epigram and tragedy, between the

Wotton and the behaviour of Dorian Gray there is clearly a sense in

which Wilde is continuing to celebrate the triumphs of a truly

individual life and to suggest that, in the perfection of personality,

self-expression can be turned into an art. And yet this world of self-

assertion and self-development is one that is seen to fall apart. For

occasions there was a congenital Puritan lurking behind his mask of

the Aesthete or the Dandy. He loved that bright world which he

created, but he also allows it to be destroyed with Dorian Gray’s cry,

‘so horrible in its agony’. In his own life he saw through his ‘pose’

and even courted his eventual destruction; in his ɹction, he raised a

its follies.

preoccupations of his period – at the end of a century, it was a time

civilization.

Yet it would be wrong to attach too long a moral to this tale

since, as Wilde himself says here,

… the only things that one can use in ɹction are the things that one has ceased to use in

fact.

This is one aspect of his aesthetic bravado but it is true in the sense

that Wilde is on this occasion a novelist rather than a philosopher or

even a cultural historian, and it is as a novel that Dorian Gray must

ɹnally be judged. As such, it is a considerable success; it may be

melodramatic in inspiration but it is a triumph of execution. Wilde

knew how to end one chapter with thunder and begin the next with

trumpets; he knew how to orchestrate the emotions of a scene and,

in that sequence where Sibyl Vane loses her powers as an artist as

soon as she has found love, he demonstrates an evocative sympathy

which is not always present in his later dramas. And if Dorian Gray

descriptive powers lift the book far above the casual sonorities of his

Henry Wotton appears.

One might say of this novel, then, what Wilde says of Society in

its pages:

Form is absolutely essential to it. It should have the dignity of a ceremony, as well as its

unreality, and should combine the insincere character of a romantic play with the wit and

beauty that make such plays delightful to us.

Here Wilde plays with paradox, which is ɹtting in a novel that is

iridescent with paradox and with the sensibility that is mediated

through wit and eʃortless display. Only shallow people refuse to

judge by appearances, to paraphrase our author, which is perhaps

why The Picture of Dorian Gray has largely escaped the attentions of

the more sombre critics and why its popularity has endured for

almost one hundred years.

Peter Ackroyd

London, 1985

OceanofPDF.com

NOTES

These notes are designed to help the reader understand Wilde’s

novel, and provide a background to the publication and revision of

its ɹnal form. They include references to signiɹcant variations in the

two published editions of this novel, and a few to the changes made

to the typescript Wilde submitted to Lippincott’s Monthly Magazine in

1890. These references to textual variants are not designed to be

exhaustive, or to enable the reader to reconstruct the earlier text.

They record the process of ‘self-censorship’ that the text underwent,

and also the artistic enrichment from which it beneɹted. Readers

who are interested in the process of revision from manuscript to

typescript and between the two published versions should consult

Donald F. Lawler’s very useful An Inquiry into Oscar Wilde’s Revisions

of ‘The Picture of Dorian Gray’ (Garland: New York, 1988); those who

wish to read the 1890 edition should consult the text prepared by

Lawler for Norton (New York, 1987). When Wilde revised the novel

he added long descriptive passages of Dorian’s various enthusiasms

for exotic items. These were designed, as Wilde put it, to ‘surround

him in an atmosphere of moral corruption’, producing a distinctly

‘decadent’ and exotic eʃect (Stuart Mason, Oscar Wilde, Art and

Morality: A record of the discussion which followed the publication of

‘Dorian Gray’ (London (1912), 80). Many of these references are

there solely for the sake of this eʃect, and the modern reader gains

little by having each term or allusion explained. In a few cases I

Penguin edition. These cases are identiɹed as (Ackroyd).

PREFACE

1 Wilde published ‘A Preface to Dorian Gray’ in the March issue of

Frank Harris’s journal, the Fortnightly Review. He devised this as a

response to the critics who had condemned the ɹrst edition of his

novel for its ‘immorality’ and ‘unhealthiness’. Having rehearsed

these arguments in his letters to critics, he now sought to preach his

aesthetic credo, a version of the principle of art for art’s sake’, ɹrst

formulized by Théophile Gautier and Edgar Allan Poe in the ɹrst

half of the nineteenth century, and adopted by Wilde’s sparring

partner, the painter James McNeill Whistler, in the 1880s. The

Fortnightly 
Review (1865–1954) was a highbrow literary and

scientiɹc journal, which published contributions by Thomas Henry

Huxley, Francis Galton, Henry Maudsley, and H. G. Wells as well as

Oscar Wilde. The Preface, of course, also advertised his novel, which

was published the following month in its extended form by Ward,

Lock & Co. He reprinted the Preface with an additional maxim: ‘No

artist is ever morbid. The artist can express everything’ with the

novel.

CHAPTER I

Japanese work’ in a lecture he gave in America in 1882 (‘The

art in ‘The Decay of Lying’ (1889).

avant-garde and the establishment which divided the British art

world at this time. The Royal Academy had been founded in the late

eighteenth century under its president Sir Joshua Reynolds, and

served as a training ground for artists to emulate the best antique

models and aspire to the grand manner. By the mid nineteenth

century it represented to the young and adventurous a stultifying

Raphaelite Brotherhood, founded in 1848 principally by Dante

Gabriel Rossetti, John Everett Millais and William Holman Hunt,

was a youthful and spirited revolt against this academic

stranglehold on English art. This in turn encouraged the

public. From then on the Grosvenor became synonymous with

recommend the Grosvenor for Basil’s painting. Wilde himself

an undergraduate at Oxford. When Gilbert and Sullivan came to

Patience (1881), they included a character called Archibald

Grosvenor and characterized the aesthetic type as ‘a greenery-

yallery, Grosvenor Gallery, / Foot-in-the-grave young man!’. Wilde’s

pronouncements on art led to the popular Academician William

Powell Frith depicting Wilde in his painting ‘A Private View, 1881’,

showing the young Oscar pontiɹcating on the exhibits at the

Academy to an enraptured group of fashionable women while a

stern-looking group of Academicians scowl in disapproval.

3 Adonis… Narcissus: In classical mythology these ɹgures stand as

consummate types of male beauty. Narcissus tragically fell in love

cruelly at him’ (Chapter VIII).

4 and the two young men went out into the garden together: In the

version of 1890 Basil is clearly troubled by Lord Henry’s interest in

not speak’, reducing the tension that had existed between them.

5 I grew afraid: Wilde deleted from 1890 the words: ‘I knew that if I

spoke to Dorian I would become absolutely devoted to him, and that

I ought not to speak to him’.

6 Stars and Garters: Denoting members of the knightly Order of the

Star and Garter, an ancient chivalric order; this reference establishes

the aristocratic tenor of the occasion. Wilde, Irish and middle-class,

was fascinated by this world, and often depicted it in his comedies.

7 Hallward shook his head: In 1890, ‘Hallward buried his face in his

hands’, in evident dismay.

8 I don’t suppose that ten per cent. of the proletariat live correctly:

Wilde had originally written ‘I don’t suppose ten per cent. of the

lower orders live with their own wives’. This was too explicit for

Wilde’s editor at Lippincott’s, who amended it to ‘correctly’; Wilde

changed ‘lower orders’ to ‘proletariat’ in 1891.

9 I couldn’t be happy if I didn’t see him every day: In 1891 Wilde

deleted the lines, ‘ “Of course sometimes it is only for a few minutes.

“But you don’t really worship him?” “I do.” ’

10 artistic idolatry: Originally ‘extraordinary romance’ in the 1890

version. Similarly, Wilde qualiɹed the use of ‘romance’ a few pages

on in 1891, when Lord Henry observes that ‘a romance of any kind…

leaves one so unromantic’.

11 the one person who gives to my art whatever charm it possesses: In

the l8go version this read: ‘the one person that makes life absolutely

lovely to me, and that gives to my art whatever wonder or charm it

possesses’. Again, the personal and passionate is rephrased in

aesthetic terms, with Wilde adding ‘my life as an artist depends on

him’ in 1891.

CHAPTER II

1 a club in Whitechapel: This refers to an institution established by

wealthy philanthropists to ‘better’ the poorest inhabitants of

London, providing education and attempting to wean them away

from the music-halls and gin palaces which proliferated in these

areas. The most famous charitable institution was Toynbee Hall,

founded in Commercial Street near Whitechapel in 1884.

Philanthropy increasingly focused on the East End of London,

especially Whitechapel and neighbouring Bethnal Green, when these

areas were considered the poorest, unhealthiest and most

criminalized districts of the capital towards the end of the century.

drew a sensational picture of life in this area, attempting to alert the

public to the plight of its inhabitants.

to be worshipped’ was deleted in 1891.

3 Eton: The most famous, prestigious and aristocratic public (that is,

private) school in England.

4 The mutilation of the savage has its tragic survival in the self-denial

that mars our lives: By alluding to savage ‘survivals’ Wilde is drawing

on, but also characteristically distorting, an idea that was inɻuential

in a number of disciplines at the time. This idea was central to the

‘comparative method’ of ethnology, whereby contemporary ‘savages’

helped to construct hypotheses about the earliest forms of human

civilization. The distinguished ethnologist Sir Edward Tylor explains

the doctrine of ‘survivals’ to which Wilde refers: ‘These are

processes, customs, opinions, and so forth, which have been carried

on by force of habit into a new state of society diʃerent from that in

which they had their original home, and they thus remain proofs

and examples of an older condition of culture of which a newer has

to invert the logic of contemporary thought.

5 Stop!… He was unconscious of the silence: Wilde added these

which dominates his tale. The term ‘inɻuences’ which appears in

introduces for the ɹrst time the idea of the ‘poisonous book’, in this

case referring to Lord Henry’s experience when he was sixteen.

6 Hermes or your silver Faun: Hermes in Greek mythology was the

son of Zeus and Maia, and was the patron of merchants and thieves.

He is usually depicted with winged sandals, and is identiɹed with

god associated with forests. Pan was a faun.

7 Oh, 
if 
it 
were 
only 
the 
other 
way!… 
mock 
me 
horribly:

Extraordinarily, Wilde did not add these lines, upon which the story

turns, until a very late stage. Along with the reference to Dorian

typescript of the 1890 edition.

8 White’s: The oldest gentlemen’s club, situated in St James’s and

founded as White’s Chocolate Club in 1693.

9 ‘I shall stay with the real Dorian,’ he said, sadly: Oddly Basil was

originally ‘smiling’ when he said this, but his mood changed at

typescript stage.

10 love… is purely a question for physiology: A view established by

Charles Darwin in his Descent of Man (1871), where he proposed the

principle of sexual selection which united the human race with the

animal kingdom.

CHAPTER III

(This was the ɹrst of the seven new chapters Wilde added in 1891

and supplies details about Dorian’s immediate ancestry.)

1 the Albany: Apartments until recently exclusively for single men,

which still survive today on Piccadilly. Famous tenants have

included Byron, ‘Monk’ Lewis, Gladstone, Edward Bulwer-Lytton,

Aldous Huxley, J. B. Priestley and Graham Greene.

2 when Isabella was young, and Prim unthought of: Refers to the queen

of Spain, Isabella II (1833–68), and Juan Prim, a general from this

period.

valet seem’d a hero.’

account of their blue wrappers.

5 jarvies: Cab-drivers.

6 There was something terribly enthralling in the exercise of inɻuence:

Inɻuence is an important theme in the novel and takes a number of

forms. There is the inɻuence which Dorian has on Basil’s art, the

inɻuence Lord Henry exerts on the impressionable Dorian, the

corresponding ‘fatal’ inɻuence which Dorian has on young men, the

inɻuence that heredity and ‘race-instinct’ have on various

individuals, the inɻuence of real life on Sibyl Vane’s acting, the

inɻuence that Dorian’s actions have on his portrait, and the

inɻuence of certain books on their readers. Once again, Wilde is

reɻecting concerns that were conspicuous at the time. The quasi-

scientiɹc tenor of Henry’s musings, and the idea that a person’s

‘soul’ could be projected into another individual, points to ideas of

‘mesmeric’ inɻuence and metempsychosis which were then

which found their way into sensational ɹctions such as H. Rider

Haggard’s She (1886), Arthur Conan Doyle’s The Parasite (1894),

(1897).

7 Buonarotti: Michelangelo Buonarroti (1475–1564), the Florentine

painter famous for his decoration of the Sistine Chapel in Rome, was

also a poet, whose love poems celebrate male beauty. Wilde

followed others in identifying Michelangelo as homosexual, and

included him among those who knew ‘the love that dare not speak

is also found in Chapter X of Dorian Gray; see below.

8 Bacchante: A follower of Bacchus, the god of wine.

9 Omar: Omar Khayyam, a twelfth-century Persian poet, whose

Rubaiyat was made popular by the translation of Edward Fitzgerald

in 1859.

10 Athenæum: One of the most imposing gentlemen’s clubs, situated

in Pall Mall. Founded in 1824, it became associated with the arts.

CHAPTER IV

1 Clodion… Les Cent Nouvelles… Margaret of Valois by Clovis Eve: The

decorative details and speciɹc references here ɹnd Wilde

embellishing his narrative with indicators of opulence and rareɹed

taste.

Abbé Antoine-François Prévost.

3 Wagner’s music: Richard Wagner (1813–83), German composer

and dramatist, whose theories (principally in The Art-work of the

Future, 1850) and operas were highly controversial at this time. To

favour Wagner indicated advanced tastes; Swinburne championed

him, Aubrey Beardsley drew ‘The Wagnerians’, and Max Nordau

than all the degenerates put together’ (Nordau, Degeneration, 1892).

Dorian and Lord Henry therefore naturally favoured Wagner.

4 the price of everything, and the value of nothing: Wilde re-used this

Windermere’s Fan (1892).

5 the search for beauty being the real secret of life: Wilde inserted the

adjective ‘poisonous’ at typescript stage, but changed this to ‘real’

when he revised the novel in 1891. This may have been in response

to the condemnation of his ‘poisonous book’, ‘spawned from the

literature of the French Décadents’ (Mason, 65). To search for a

‘poisonous beauty’ encapsulates the very idea of ‘Decadence’, and

Wilde perhaps wished to tone this element down. He certainly

changed a reference to ‘the French school of Décadents’ to

‘Symbolistes’ in 1891; see note 8 to Chapter X, below.

districts of the capital at this time. Oliver Twist ɹnds himself lost in

Weir, ‘St Giles, Past and Present’, in Flint (ed.), The Victorian Novelist

Dorian passes. A trip eastward from Piccadilly, at ɻâneur pace,

eventually bringing Dorian to the theatre in Holborn, would take

described by Charles Dickens in one of his Sketches by Boz in 1837.

7 The Idiot Boy, or Dumb but Innocent: Sentimental and melodramatic

pieces popular with lower-class audiences at the time.

8 hautbois: Oboe.

9 One evening she is Rosalind… reed-like throat: Referring to some of

Shakespeare’s heroines. Rosalind is a character in As You Like It, in

which she wanders through the forest of Arden disguised as a boy.

Imogen appears in Cymbeline, Juliet in Romeo and Juliet poisons

herself in this manner. Ophelia in Hamlet is driven mad, and

Desdemona is strangled by the Moor in Othello.

Yellow Book (1894).

11 what are your actual relations with Sibyl Vane?: Wilde had

originally written ‘– tell me, is Sybil [sic] Vane your mistress?’, and

a few lines later, ‘I suppose she will be your mistress some day’, but

this ‘belong to you’ in 1891.

12 The Bristol: A hotel on Piccadilly.

13 People are very fond of giving away what they need most themselves:

Wilde had originally had Dorian ask Henry if ‘ “Basil has got a

passion for somebody?” “Yes, he has. Has he never told you?” ’, but

he altered this on the typescript to the slightly less explicit: ‘ “You

him?” “I don’t know whether he has any passion, but he certainly

has romance,” said Lord Henry, with an amused look in his eyes.

“Has he never let you know that?” ’ He removed these lines in 1891.

14 He had been always enthralled by the methods of natural science:

Despite his antipathy to the Naturalism of Emile Zola, Wilde’s

description of Lord Henry’s interests comes close to describing that

novelist’s ɹctional methods. Wilde made fun of Zola’s ‘tedious

and the schools of psychologists in his novel testify. His emphasis on

Vane even comes close to Zola’s methods in this respect.

CHAPTER V

(Added in 1891, this chapter introduces the characters of James

Vane and his mother, adding intrigue, melodrama and comic

elements to the narrative.)

1 bismuth-whitened hands: A cosmetic preparation, suggesting that

Sibyl’s mother was one of the ‘painted’ actresses whom Dorian

disparages a few pages before.

2 tableau: This was a common spectacle in the popular theatre at the

time, whereby elaborate (and often risque) scenes were staged as

‘living paintings’. Each act of popular plays would often end with a

tableau, which froze the action at its most intense and melodramatic

heights. The melodramatic art was basically gestural, relying on a

repertoire of striking stances to convey passions. Wilde had little

appreciated its artiɹce.

3 Euston Road: A poor area, where Euston, St Pancras and King’s

Cross railway termini serve the North and Midlands.

4 hated him through some curious race-instinctfor which he could not

account: Here Wilde reinforces the importance of heredity in the

ancestry is also his destiny. As is revealed shortly, the ‘instinct’ that

causes James to hate gentlemen is a consequence of the fact that his

aristocratic mother married beneath her. The reference to James’s

further hints at this. Intriguingly and (it would appear)

coincidentally, Thomas Hardy had used a similar image for a similar

purpose in Chapter XLVII of Tess of the D’Urbervilles (1891), where

Tess slaps Alec round the face with her leather glove: ‘It was heavy

and thick as a warrior’s, and it struck him ɻat on the mouth. Fancy

might have regarded the act as the recrudescence of a trick in which

her mailed progenitors were not unpractised.’ The narrator is

suggesting that this action recalls Tess’s own ‘race instinct’, a throw

back to her long-buried aristocratic ancestry, which reverts to feudal

type in action. Wilde’s use of this image appeared for the ɹrst time

by February, making this shared reference to behavioural atavisms

(1994).

in Park Lane, was cast from French guns in 1822 in honour of the

it was the ɹrst public nude statue displayed in England.

CHAPTER VI

1 Hallward started, and then frowned: In 1890 Hallward ‘turned

perfectly pale, and a curious look ɻashed for a moment into his

eyes, and then passed away, leaving them dull’. Wilde tones down

Basil’s obvious dismay at learning he has a ‘romantic’ rival in Sibyl.

2 Messalina: Wife of the emperor Claudius, she was a byword for

adulterous conduct.

3 to be highly organized is, I should fancy, the object of man’s existence:

Wilde added this line in 1891. ‘Organization’ carries a scientiɹc

connotation referring to the ability of life forms to adapt and thrive.

The philosopher Herbert Spencer laid down that the ɹrst principles

of evolutionary development consist in the movement from

homogeneity to heterogeneity, or from simple to complex forms.

CHAPTER VII

1 Miranda… Caliban: Characters from Shakespeare’s The Tempest.

Miranda is the beautiful daughter of Prospero, the enchanter who

keeps the monster Caliban as his abject slave. Wilde uses Caliban to

exemplify ugliness in the Preface to his novel. Robert Browning did,

however, give Shakespeare’s tormented creature a degree of pathos

and humanity in his dramatic mono logue ‘Caliban on Setebos’

(1862).

2 Rosalind… Cordelia: Heroines in Shakespeare’s plays As You Like It,

The Merchant of Venice, Much Ado About Nothing and King Lear

respectively.

3 I have grown sick of shadows: These lines echo Tennyson’s poem

‘The Lady of Shalott’, where the Lady complains: ‘I am half sick of

shadows’. This reference is appropriate here, as Tennyson also

describes a woman trapped in an artiɹcial world, forced to view life

through a mirror. When she breaks from her bonds in pursuit of Sir

Lancelot, a ‘curse’ is eʃected which kills her. This theme was

popular with artists at the time, and many paintings were produced

in the Pre-Raphaelite style depicting Tennyson’s tragic ɹgure and

often carrying the refrain which Wilde borrows here.

retains some stalls selling market produce.

heightening the dramatic eʃect of this key moment in the narrative.

CHAPTER VIII

1 Was there some subtle aɽnity… what that soul thought, they realized:

The speculations found in this passage had originally been

statements. The typescript had originally stated that ‘there was some

subtle aɽnity’ and ‘what the soul thought, they realized’, but Wilde

adopted this more speculative tone when he amended the typescript

in 1890.

2 Patti: Adelina Patti (1843–1919), a famous singer.

3 Imust sow poppies in my garden… I had buried my romance in abed of

asphodel: Both ɻowers are associated with death and the underworld

of Greek mythology. Asphodels were planted on graves, and the

groves of Hades were known as the plains of Asphodel. Poppies

were associated with Ceres, corn goddess, but also mother of

forgetfulness.

4 Conscience makes egotists of us all: An adaptation of Hamlet’s line,

‘Thus conscience does make cowards of us all’ (Hamlet, III. i).

5 Webster… Ford… Tourneur: John Webster (1578?–1632?), John

Ford (1586?–1639) and Cyril Tourneur (1575?–1626) were

tragedians who ɻourished at the time of James I. Their plays are

characterized by violent plots, usually centring on revenge by the

most elaborate means.

6 Poor Sibyl!… and looked again at the picture: Wilde added this

paragraph to the typescript in 1890.

7 For a moment he thought of praying… Why inquire too closely into

it?: Wilde added this paragraph to the typescript in 1890,

introducing one of the many passages of ‘scientiɹc’ speculation

which increased with the various revisions to his novel.

CHAPTER IX

1 Gautier: Theophile Gautier (1811–72), poet and novelist, whose

Preface to his novel Mademoiselle de Maupin (a highly ornate tale of

lesbianism and cross-dressing, published in 1834) articulated the

principle of ‘art for art’s sake’, providing a rallying cry for writers

referred to his works.

2 Marlow: Wilde had originally spelt this town in Buckinghamshire

‘Marlowe’, perhaps after the homosexual poet and playwright

Christopher Marlowe (1564–93). This may of course be merely a

typo, missed by Wilde and his editor, and corrected in 1891.

However, the reference to the two men being ‘down at Marlowe

together’ does seem somewhat gratuitous in this context, and may

be a sly homoerotic reference.

3 The painter felt strangely moved: Wilde had originally written

‘Hallward felt strangely moved. Rugged and straightforward as he

its tenderness’, but deleted these lines in 1891.

4 Georges Petit… Rue de Sèze: A Parisian gallery opened in 1882

which promoted painters like Renoir, Sisley, Boudin and Whistler.

5 Dorian, from the moment I met you…: In the 1890 version this

confession began, ‘It is quite true that I have worshipped you with

far more romance of feeling than a man usually gives to a friend.’

Wilde had added ‘of feeling’, and his editor changed ‘should ever

give’ to ‘usually’ at typescript stage. See the Introduction for a

discussion of the changes Wilde made to this passage.

6 I had drawn you as Paris… the marvel of your own face: This

passage originally appeared in a diʃerent form in the ɹrst chapter of

the 1890 edition, when Basil tells Lord Henry about his new model.

pool.

7 every ɻake and ɹlm of colour seemed to me to reveal my secret:

followed here. But that was all: Wilde cancelled the line ‘He felt no

romance for him’ which followed here in the typescript.

8 But that was all: Wilde cancelled the line ‘He felt no romance for

him’ which followed here in the typescript.

9 really inɻuenced my art: Wilde had originally written ‘You have

been the one person in my life of whom I have been really fond. I

meeting.’ He cancelled the last sentence in 1890, and amended the

ɹrst part in 1891.

10 in a friendship so coloured by romance: Wilde’s editor at

Lippincott’s cancelled the line ‘something inɹnitely tragic in a

romance that was at once so passionate and so sterile’ in 1890.

CHAPTER X

business with the housekeeper Leaf, which had shown a more

human side to Dorian.

2 Michael Angelo… and Shakespeare himself: Michel de Montaigne

(1533–92), French essayist; Johann Winckelmann (1717–68), an art

some letters Wilde had written to his lover Lord Alfred Douglas, and

some poems the latter had published in a journal called the

referred to ‘the Love that dare not speak its name’. Asked if this

meant ‘unnatural love’, Wilde replied:

‘The Love that dare not speak its name’ in this century is such a

great aʃection of an elder for a younger man as there was between

David and Jonathan, such as Plato made the very basis of his

philosophy, and such as you ɹnd in the sonnets of Michelangelo and

Shakespeare. It is that deep, spiritual aʃection that is as pure as it is

perfect. It dictates and pervades great works of art like those of

as they are. It is in this century misunderstood, so much

nothing unnatural about it. It is intellectual, and it repeatedly exists

between an elder and a younger man, when the elder man has

(Hyde, The Trials of Oscar Wilde (1948), 236.)

Gothic architectural fantasy of William Beckford, which was built in

1796 and collapsed (under the sheer weight of its extravagance) in

1825, although most of the extraordinary collection of objets

d’arthad been sold oʃ in 1822. Beckford’s life of scandalous

homosexual extravagance compelled him to live in seclusion and

exile.

4 I don’t go in much at present for religious art: Understandably, for a

man who had just seen his own soul staring at him from a canvas.

5 I am afraid it is rather heavy: This had originally been the occasion

for a rather poor joke about modern art. Wilde changed it at

that the painted conscience forced Dorian to carry around with him:

‘a terrible load to carry’; but in 1891 he changed the tone again to

the matter-of-fact statement retained here.

ambiguous.

7 It was the strangest book that he had ever read: This book is

sometimes identiɹed as Joris Karl Huysmans’s A Rebours (‘against

book was ‘partly suggested by Huysmans’s A Rebours… It is a

temperament in our inartistic age’ (letter to E. W. Pratt, in Hart-

and eventual physical collapse, of an aristocratic Parisian recluse.

on Des Esseintes, the hero of Huysmans’s novel, as is the ‘scientiɹc’

and experimental approach Lord Henry adopts to experience.

However, the book is only partly modelled on Huysmans’s ‘breviary

of Decadence’. Wilde had originally given this book a ɹctitious title

and author, Le Secret de Raoulpar Catulle Sarrazin, but cancelled this

in the typescript, wisely shrouding the book in mystery, hinting at

rather than specifying a number of likely candidates.

8 ɹnest artists of the French school of Symbolistes: Symbolism in poetry

was never organized into a ‘school’ as such, but centred around the

key tones from the ‘Decadent’ palette. Arthur Symons, the poet and

critic, published a study of these poets in 1893 entitled ‘The

‘Symbolist’ when he revised it in 1898, perhaps as a consequence of

Wilde’s downfall, when he was called the ‘high priest of the

Decadents’.

CHAPTER XI

1 to ‘make themselves perfect by the worship of beauty’: A line quoted

by the art critic Walter Pater in his novel Marius the Epicurean

(1885), which does not in fact come from Dante (Ackroyd).

of the outɹts he designed for some of his public appearances.

3 the author of the ‘Satyricon’: Petronius Arbiter, who acted as Nero’s

‘judge of taste’. The Satyricon is a Latin novel which has survived in

a fragment and which is attributed to him. Petronius is Des

Esseintes’ favourite Latin author.

4 element of strangeness that is so essential to romance: Echoes Walter

Pater’s claim that ‘It is the addition of strangeness to beauty, that

constitutes the romantic character in art’ (‘Romanticism’, 1876).

5 antinomianism: Being exempt from the law of God.

6 Darwinismus movement in Germany: Versions of Darwin’s theories

were highly inɻuential in Germany, where scientists like Ernst

Haeckel elaborated on his theories and applied them to diverse

areas of physiology. This reference reinforces the theme of

Dorian is his own psychologist.

7 And so he would now study perfumes: Dorian’s various enthusiasms

delineated at great length and detail in this chapter owe much to

Huysmans’s novel, where Des Esseintes pursues similar, and even

more elaborate, schemes and experiments.

8 ‘Tannhauser’, and seeing… a presentation of the tragedy of his own

soul: An opera by Richard Wagner from 1844. The theme of the poet

Tannhauser, who spends a year with Venus but fails to be granted

and poets of the late nineteenth century, including Algernon Charles

Swinburne, Edward Burne-Jones and Aubrey Beardsley.

9 He discovered wondeful stories, also, about jewels… Even to read of

the luxury of the dead was wonderful: Wilde added these historico-

mystical 
descriptions 
(and 
those 
detailing 
his 
interest 
in

ecclesiastical vestments) in manuscript to the typescript he

submitted to Lippincott’s in 1890.

10 dreadful places near Blue Gate Fields: South of Whitechapel, and

close to Shadwell, this area had a reputation for vice and criminality

throughout most of the nineteenth century. It was also known for its

opium dens, and we later learn that Dorian makes occasional trips

to the docks to visit such establishments. Originally Wilde had been

no more speciɹc than referring to ‘dreadful places near the docks’,

but altered this in the typescript, as he did the lines stating that

Sweet, Inventing the Victorians, pp. 86–102.

11 I think not: This is the only place in the book where the narrator

ventures an opinion directly.

12 He loved to stroll through the gaunt cold picture-gallery of his country

house…: Wilde’s principal model for this passage, and Dorian’s

musing on the role of heredity in determining his life, is Huysmans’s

A Rebours, which opens in a similar gallery, and refers to the ‘freak

of heredity’ which linked Des Esseintes with a ‘distant ancestor [a]

court favourite’. Thomas Hardy made similar use of ancestral

portraits in Tess of the D’Urbervilles, also published in 1891. The

importance of Dorian’s ancestral portraits and the various contexts

which inform Wilde’s use of them is discussed in the Introduction.

marriage was later declared invalid.

14 wonderful novel: ‘dangerous novel’ in 1890.

15 Tiberius… Caligula… Domitian: A roll-call of debauched and

decadent Roman emperors.

16 Dorian Gray had been poisoned by a book: Wilde cancelled the

phrase ‘and by a picture’ in the typescript.

CHAPTER XII

1 the eve of his own thirty-eighth birthday: In the 1890 edition the date

given is 7 November, and his thirty-second birthday. In the later

version Wilde gives the events of Dorian’s life a longer duration in

which to develop.

2 Victoria: A major London railway terminus (in fact, at the time

two stations in one), serving Brighton and the South Coast, and also

Chatham and Dover, allowing access to the English Channel and

thence to France.

3 the most dreadful things are being said against you in London: In the

1890 edition this had been followed by the line, ‘– things that I

could hardly repeat to you’, cancelled in 1891.

his ɹngers that I hated: Wilde gave this idea a comic twist in his short

‘Visible Vices’ in the Introduction for the signiɹcance of this belief at

the time Wilde wrote his novel.

5 Why is your friendship so fatal to young men?: Wilde had originally

written ‘Why is it that every young man that you take up, seems to

come to grief, to go to the bad at once?’, but his editor changed this

in the typescript.

6 You ask me why…: The details of these various scandals were

added in 1891. Originally Dorian refused to answer these

allegations, allowing the nature of the rumours to remain in mystery

or ambiguity.

7 What about your country house, and the life that is led there?: Wilde

had originally followed this line with ‘It is quite suɽcient to say of a

and titter’, but his editor cancelled it in the typescript.

8 always a staunch friend to you: ‘devoted to you’ in 1890.

9 bad, and corrupt, and shameful: ‘infamous’ in 1890.

CHAPTER XIII

1 you met me, ɻattered me: ‘devoted yourself to me’ in 1890; the

word ‘ideal’ later in this passage was ‘romance’ in 1890.

2 This is the face of a satyr: In Greek mythology a satyr was a

woodland 
demi-god, 
associated 
with 
lechery 
and 
usually

represented in grotesque form. Hamlet refers to his uncle Claudius

as having the face of a satyr when he contrasts him with his own

father, whom he compares with Hyperion, the sun (Hamlet, I, ii).

3 bull’s-eye: A lantern with a thick disc of glass, resembling the

‘bull’s-eye’ at the centre of an archery target.

4 Blue Book: A society directory.

CHAPTER XIV

1 he remarked that every face that he drew seemed to have a fantastic

likeness to Basil Hallward: This idea, which eʃectively indicates the

onset of Dorian’s psychological decline, had earlier been used by

Wilde in his study of the poisoner Wainewright, ‘Pen, Pencil and

Poison’. He remarks how ‘M. Zola, in one of his novels [His

Masterpiece], tells of a young man who, having committed a murder,

takes to art, and paints greenish impressionist portraits of perfectly

victim.’

2 those lovely stanzas upon Venice:

To see, her bosom covered o’er 

With pearls, her body suave, 

The Adriatic Venus soar 

On sound’s chromatic wave.

The domes that on the water dwell

Pursue the melody 

In clear drawn cadences, and swell 

Like breasts of love that sigh.

My chains around a pillar cast 

I land before a fair 

And rosy-pale facade at last, 

Upon a marble stair.

(Taken from The Works of Theophile Gautier, trans. Agnes Lee, 1903)

(Ackroyd)

3 Obelisk in the Place de la Concorde…‘monstre charmant’: A large

pink granite obelisk from Luxor in Egypt, counterparts of which are

found in London and New York, is set in the centre of the Place de

la Concorde at the foot of the Champs-Elysees in Paris. The monstre

charmant (‘sweet monster’) is a statue of a hermaphrodite found in

the Louvre, not far from the similarly displaced obelisk.

4 Natural Science Tripos: The undergraduate degree at Cambridge, so

called because it is made up of three parts. Cambridge has for some

time been associated with science – both Newton and Darwin were

at Cambridge – while Oxford has traditionally attracted and

cultivated artists. Wilde was an Oxonian.

5 Rubinstein: Artur Rubinstein (1829–94), Russian pianist and

composer.

CHAPTER XV

(Wilde added this and the next two chapters in 1891.)

1 chaud-froid: Cold jellied meats.

2 her hair turned quite gold from grief: A line Wilde liked so much he

re-used it in The Importance of Being Earnest (1895). Mrs Erlynne, the

‘pushing nobody’ who appears at this gathering in Dorian Gray,

pushes her way into Wilde’s comedy Lady Windermere’s Fan (1892),

to play quite an important role.

3 trop de zèle… Trop d’audace: Too zealous; too audacious/impudent.

4 ɹn de siècle: The phrase simply means ‘end of the century’, but

carries a weight of connotations about a state of mind (weariness,

cynicism and a supposed laxity of morals or standards), and a sense

of foreboding; hence it being coupled within du globe, ‘end of the

world’, here. The phrase, and the sensibility associated with it, were

beginning to enter the popular consciousness at around this time,

with commentators attempting to make connections between

various social and artistic phenomena, suggesting that these things

heralded an impending collapse in standards. Principal among these

(Entartung, 1892; English translation, 1895) diagnosed the

suʃered to reel and fall, because man is weary, and there is no faith

that is worth an eʃort to up-hold them’ (5–6).

5 Debrett: A directory providing details of the lineage of the British

and Irish aristocracy.

6 Inside was a green paste waxy in lustre: The substance here is

presumably opium. Opium was widely used for a number of

we already know that Lord Henry smokes opium-tainted cigarettes.

However, raw opium, which would be waxy, would either be dark

brown (from Smyrna) or reddish brown (from Constantinople or

Egypt). A greenish substance is more likely hashish; so perhaps

resolves to visit an opium den.

CHAPTER XVI

1 Once the man lost his way, and had to drive back half a mile: Wilde is

and confound the intellects of hackney-coachmen. I could almost

in the modern charts of London.’ While De Quincey is probably

depicting St Giles or Seven Dials, near his Oxford Street lodgings in

the West End of London, Wilde is clearly alluding to these

trip east.

somewhere near the docks, between Shadwell and Limehouse (areas

associated with these establishments). The most famous ɹctional

account of an opium den was provided by Dickens in The Mystery of

double life of outward respectability and clandestine indulgence in

opium. Dickens visited a den which he claimed was near Shadwell,

months after the publication of Wilde’s revised novel.

CHAPTER XVII

1 Tartuʃe: A character typifying hypocrisy, from Moliere’s play The

Hypocrite.

2 the survival of the pushing… It is a malady: This exchange

exempliɹes the polarities that were drawn at the end of the

nineteenth century, between ‘getting on’, and the attitude cultivated

by self-consciously avant-garde artists. Again, Max Nordau’s

Degeneration provides the best testimony to this opposition. Here the

principles of ‘social Darwinism’, the application of evolutionary laws

to social phenomena in order to explain why the ‘ɹttest’ (bourgeois)

citizens would triumph, was celebrated, and the ‘diseased’

tendencies of unconventional art were stigmatized. For Nordau such

aesthetic ‘degenerates’ as Nietzsche, Wagner, Zola, Huysmans, Ibsen,

Baudelaire and Wilde ‘must succumb… They can neither adapt

themselves to the conditions of Nature and civilization, nor

maintain themselves in the struggle for existence against the

healthy.’ 
For 
Nordau, 
conventional 
art 
was 
healthy, 
and

unconventional art – and therefore its practitioners – were

values which Nordau champions.

3 the Parthian manner: A Parthian retreat is one in which a

combatant attacks while appearing to retreat from the ɹeld of

battle.

CHAPTER XVIII

1 ennui: boredom. In stigmatizing boredom in this way, and using

the French word, Wilde is following Charles Baudelaire, who

famously prefaced his infamous book of poems, Les Fleurs du Mal

(‘Flowers of Evil’), with a poem dedicated to the reader. In this he

claims ‘ennui’ is the ugliest and foulest of all vices, and rounds on

the reader as the scandalous poet’s ‘counterpart’ and ‘brother’.

2 Artemis: A Greek goddess who was fond of hunting, called Diana

in Roman mythology.

3 strawberry leaves: A ducal crown is embellished with strawberry

leaves.

CHAPTER XIX

(Originally this was the ɹnal chapter, coming directly after

Campbell had disposed of Basil Hallward’s body (now Chapter XIV).

Wilde divided it in two in 1891.)

1 Do you think this girl will ever be really contented now with any one of

her own rank?: Wilde may be thinking of a scene from Huysmans’s À

Rebours, where Des Esseintes deliberately creates such a situation. In

murderer by introducing him to reɹned vices, and then, when they

have become a necessity to him, cutting oʃ his supply: ‘I shall have

contributed, to the best of my ability, to the making of a scoundrel,

one enemy the more for the hideous society which is bleeding us

white’ (Against Nature, trans. Baldick (1959), 92). The amoral Lord

Henry has many points of comparison with Des Esseintes.

2 Waterbury watch: A watch of little value.

3 simply 
a 
method 
of 
procuring 
extraordinary 
sensations: This

paragraph was added in 1891.

4 A face without a heart: Hamlet, IV. vii.

5 some vulgar street-preacher: In 1872 the right of assembly was

granted to the area at the north-east corner of Hyde Park, where

speakers could express their views in freedom. Speakers’ Corner, as

it is now known, exists today and is –inexplicably – a popular

Sunday attraction.

6 Marsyas: In Greek mythology Marsyas was a satyr who learned to

play the ɻute and challenged Apollo to a music contest. He lost, and

was ɻayed alive by the god.

7 What an exquisite life you have had!: Originally this was followed

by the lines ‘I have always been too much of a critic. I have been

afraid of things wounding me, and have looked on’, but Wilde

cancelled these lines in the typescript.

8 You have crushed the grapes against your palate: An echo of Keats’s

‘Ode on Melancholy’, which ends with the lines:

Though seen by none save him whose strenuous tongue 

Can burst Joy’s grape against his palate ɹne; 

His soul shall taste the sadness of her might, 

And be among her cloudy trophies hung.

9 As for being poisoned by a book, there is no such thing as that: In l891

Wilde added this refutation of one of the most signiɹcant ideas in

the novel. Lord Henry’s denial of the dangerous eʃects of literature

is aimed at the critics who had labelled Dorian Gray itself

‘poisonous’, a common term in the repertoire of moralistic criticism

at the time. Lord Henry’s contention that ‘The books that the world

calls immoral are books that show the world its own shame’

elaborates on the strategy Wilde employed when he defended the

1890 edition of his book in the press: ‘Each man sees his own sin in

Dorian Gray. What Dorian Gray’s sins are no one knows. He who

ɹnds them has brought them’ (letter to the Scots Observer; Mason,

81). It also illustrates the maxims found in the Preface concerning

Caliban’s rage at the reɻective power of art.

CHAPTER XX

(This chapter originally formed part of Chapter XIII, the ɹnal

chapter in the 1890 edition. The major changes Wilde eʃected when

he revised this chapter were to make explicit the motive behind

Dorian’s ɹnal actions. He sought to tone down the ‘too obvious’

moral and to make it clear that Dorian rebelled against the burden

of conscience that the portrait had become, and sought to free

himself from its reproaches.)

1 Was there no hope for him?: Wilde added the next two paragraphs,

from ‘Ah! in what a monstrous moment of pride and passion’, to

‘Youth had spoiled him’ in 1891.

2 No. There had been nothing more… He recognized that now: Wilde

added this realization in 1891.

3 It would kill this monstrous soul-life, and without its hideous warnings,

he would be at peace: Wilde added this important sentence in 1891,

making it explicit that Dorian sought freedom from the claims of

conscience.

OceanofPDF.com

