Contents

Title Page

Maps

Introduction

The Prince

Chapter 1

Chapter 2

Chapter 3

Chapter 4

Chapter 5

Chapter 6

Chapter 7

Chapter 8

Chapter 9

Chapter 10

Chapter 11

Chapter 12

Chapter 13

Chapter 14

Chapter 15

Chapter 16

Chapter 17

Chapter 18

Chapter 19

Chapter 20

Chapter 21

Chapter 22

Chapter 23

Chapter 24

Chapter 25

Chapter 26

Discourses Upon the First Ten Books of Titus Livy

Book One

Book Two

Book Three

Chronology, Notes, and Selected Bibliography

Copyright Page

Introduction

IT IS a commonplace irony that The Prince—the classic handbook
on power politics—should have owed its birth to the collapse of its
author's own political career and to the practical failure of his most
cherished military innovation.

Machiavelli's official entry into politics occurred in 1498 with his
appointment as Secretary to the Second Chancery of the Signoria, a
position rather loosely defined, involving him in military matters as
well as domestic and foreign affairs. In this post he remained until
the fall of the Florentine Republic in 1512. Through all his years in
office, despite pronounced reservations about the generally
conciliatory policies of his government, he remained loyal to it and
served his superiors with tireless energy. When Pier Soderini was
elected Gonfalonier, or chief magistrate, of the Republic in 1502,
Machiavelli became one of his most trusted assistants. He was
assigned to important missions both in Italy and abroad. The
lengthy reports he submitted in the performance of these duties
bear evidence of his sagacity as an observer, quick and sure in
locating the center of power in any political situation and accurate
in assessing its strength, but somewhat unskilled in the game of
man-to-man diplomacy. They also attest to his passionate concern
for the security of his homeland and his readiness to seek solutions

that lay beyond the strict limits of his professional competence and
authority. He was also ordered to draw up proposals on some of the
vexing issues facing the Republic. These reveal in capsule form
some of the important ideas we find in his later political writings.

Perhaps his finest hour came in 1509 when, after a fifteen-year
struggle, the Florentines finally reduced Pisa into submission.
Much of the credit for this feat belongs to Machiavelli. Though by
no means a military man, he actually directed the land and sea
blockade that brought about Pisa's capitulation. Moreover, the
civilian troops who had manned the operation had come into being
at his insistence and had been trained under his supervision. On this
occasion his conviction, one which runs like a refrain through
nearly all of his political writings—that a healthy state must rely
solely upon its own citizen forces in war—bore fruit. It was to do
otherwise three years later at Prato, when Machiavelli's career and
the Republic foundered together.

Perhaps the real cause of this calamitous event goes back to
Soderini's insistence upon friendship with France as a cardinal rule
of his foreign policy. Costly and difficult as it often proved, this
policy nevertheless served to protect Florence from the threats of
her powerful neighbors so long as France continued to count in the
affairs of the peninsula. In 1511, however, Pope Julius II (together
with Venice, Spain, and England) organized the Holy League and
launched a campaign to drive the French out of Italy. During the
war that ensued both the Holy League and the French sought
assistance from Florence, but Soderini, having sent a token force to
the French, tried to avoid serious entanglement. The result was that
Florence incurred the enmity of both parties and (as Machiavelli
could have predicted) faced the likelihood of being pounced upon
by whichever side emerged the winner. To avoid this danger,

Soderini then labored to arm the Republic, relying not upon
mercenaries, as had so often been done before, but upon a citizen
militia of the sort that had proved its merit—so it seemed—in the
struggle with Pisa. Machiavelli, the prime mover of this innovation,
had doubtless inspired Soderini with some of his own confidence in
it. Thus when the Holy League—thanks to the last-minute
intervention of the Swiss—triumphed over the French, the scene of
action shifted quickly to the frontiers of the Republic. Spanish
troops, accompanied by Cardinal de' Medici, soon appeared and
demanded the overthrow of the government. Assured that the
unfledged forces Machiavelli had recruited could withstand the
invader, Soderini refused to give way. The Spaniards then attacked,
choosing Prato—heavily garrisoned with green recruits—as their
target. After only a short struggle the enemy effected a breach in
the city wall, poured through, overwhelmed the fleeing defenders,
and sacked the town completely.

This was on August 29, 1512. Two days later Soderini resigned and
went into exile. The Medici, after an absence of eighteen years,
reassumed control of Florence. Six weeks after Prato, Machiavelli
was dismissed from office and banished from the city for the term
of one year. Thus the scene was set for The Prince and The
Discourses.

But not quite. Early in 1513 Machiavelli was suspected of
complicity in a plot to overthrow the Medici government. He was
arrested, tortured, and soon after released, his innocence having
been satisfactorily established. The incident should have destroyed
any lingering hope of a rapid reentry into politics under the new
rulers, but The Prince itself is ample evidence that it had no such
effect.

    Machiavelli withdrew to the meager farm near San Casciano
which his father had left him. There impending poverty troubled
him, though he had been short of funds before. But enforced
idleness in rustic surroundings for this restless man of forty-three
was an entirely new burden. Throughout his fourteen years of
service he had been a high-level functionary. He had visited some
of the key trouble spots of his day and had represented the
Republic on difficult missions in France, in Germany, in Rome, and
in the petty courts of Italian princelings. He had dealt with some of
the leading figures of his age, the movers and shakers of his world.
Now, in Polonius' words, he was reduced to

    be no assistant for a state. But keep a farm and carters.

    How he reacted to this suddenly slackened tempo and reduced
circumstances we know from a letter he wrote to his friend
Francesco Vettori less than a year later. The mingling of trifling
details with serious matters, the shifting of tone, alternating
between genial humor and hints of despair, are typical of
Machiavelli's familiar letters in which the salient features of his
mind and character stand out strikingly:

. . . What my life is, I will tell you. I get up at sunrise and go to a
grove of mine which I am having chopped down. I spend a couple
of hours there, checking up on the work of the previous day and
passing the time with the woodcutters, who are never without some
trouble or other, either among themselves or with the neighbors. On
the subject of this grove, I could tell you a host of interesting things
that have happened involving Frosino da Panzano and others who
wanted some of the wood. Frosino in particular sent for a few cords

of it without telling me, and when it came to paying he wanted to
hold back ten lire because he claimed I owed him that much as
winnings from a game of cricca we played four years ago at the
home of Antonio Guicciardini. I began to raise the devil. I wanted
to accuse the carter who had come for it of theft. But Giovanni
Machiavelli came between us and made us settle. Battista
Guicciardini, Filippo Ginori, Tommaso del Bene, and certain other
citizens each ordered a cord when that ill wind was blowing.* I
promised some to all of them and sent a cord to Tommaso. But it
turned out to be only half a cord after it reached Florence because
he, his wife, his servants, and children were all there helping to
stack it. . . . Finally, seeing who was making the profit on it, I told
the others that I had no more wood, whereupon they all made quite
a fuss—especially Battista, who ranks this with the other
misfortunes of Prato.**

When I leave the grove, I go to a spring and from there to my bird
snares. I carry a book under my arm—Dante or Petrarch, or one of
the minor poets like Tibullus, Ovid, or the like. I read about their
amorous passions, and their loves call my own to mind, so I delight
a while in these thoughts. Then I betake myself to the inn on the
highway. I chat with the people going by, ask for news from their
home towns, learn a few things, and note the various tastes and
curious notions of men. Meanwhile lunchtime arrives and, together
with my family, I eat whatever food my poor house and scanty
patrimony afford. Having lunched, I return to the inn. There I
generally find the innkeeper, a butcher, a miller, and two kiln-
tenders. In their company I idle the rest of the day away playing at
cricca and tricchetrach—games that give rise to a host of quarrels,
cutting remarks, and insults. Often we fight over a penny and are
heard yelling as far off as San Casciano. Set down among these

lice, this is how I keep the mould from my brain and find release
from Fortune's malice. I am content to have her beat me down this
way to see if she won't become ashamed.

At nightfall I return home and enter my study. There on the
threshold I remove my dirty, mud-spattered clothes, slip on my
regal and courtly robes, and thus fittingly attired, I enter the ancient
courts of bygone men where, having received a friendly welcome, I
feed on the food that is mine alone and that I was born for. I am not
ashamed to speak with them and inquire into the reasons for their
actions; and they answer me in kindly fashion. And so for four
hours I feel no annoyance; I forget all troubles; poverty holds no
fears, and death loses its terrors. I become entirely one of them.
And since Dante says that there can be no knowledge without
retention, I have set down what I have gained from their
conversations and composed a little book, De Principatibus, in
which I probe as deeply as I can . . . into the subject, discussing
what a principality is, what kinds there are, how they are won, how
they are maintained, and why they are lost. If ever any trifle of
mine has pleased you, this one should not displease you; and to a
prince—especially a new prince—it ought to be welcome.
Therefore I am addressing it to the Magnificent Giuliano [de'
Medici]. . . .

I am going to waste. I cannot go on this way for long without
becoming contemptible in my poverty. Besides, there is my wish
that these Medici lords would begin to use me, even if they were to
start by setting me to roll a stone, for if I should then fail to win
their confidence I could only blame myself. Having read this thing,
one will see that I did not sleep or gamble away the fifteen years I
was engaged in the study of statecraft, and anyone ought to value
the services of a man who has become richly experienced at

another's expense. As to my loyalty, there should be no doubt, for
having always kept faith, I am not about to begin breaking it now.
Anyone who has been faithful and true as I have been for forty-
three years can hardly change his nature, and my poverty is witness
to my honesty and goodness. . . .

    The letter is dated December 10, 1513, and this is the first
mention of The Prince. There is really no need to look further for
Machiavelli's motive in writing it. Yet this motive has not always
been fully understood. Some critics, recalling Machiavelli's
republican sympathies and his long service to Soderini's
government, have attributed the work to crass opportunism and
have charged the writer with hypocrisy. Such a view is, to say the
least, an oversimplification. It overlooks the spirit of the book and
tends to falsify the political temper of the times. If we assume that
Machiavelli chose to play the devil's advocate merely to get a job,
we will miss the warmth of feeling that informs his pages, for
underneath the crisp and chilling logic the thought often glows with
indignation, with hope that is wrung from despair and defies logic.
Far from being a brilliant exercise in opportunism, The Prince is a
desperate effort to find a remedy for the wretched conditions into
which his country had fallen. “I love my country more than my
soul,” Machiavelli wrote, and The Prince reflects this.

To be sure, poverty and idleness weighed on him. But politics was
his life, “the food that is mine alone,” he says, “and that I was born
for.” For him to be cut off from political activity was like being
deprived of vital air. The degree to which he was possessed by this
furor politicus should be gauged not so much by his large body of
writings on the subject as by the high place political matters held in
his scheme of values. Surely nothing stood higher. And this helps
to explain how he came to his major political discovery.

Machiavelli's chief contribution to political thought lies in his
freeing political action from moral considerations. For him, the
political imperative was essentially unrelated to the ethical
imperative. This is not to say that he was an advocate of
immorality. There is ample evidence, in fact, that he held moral
views which, by and large, coincided with those of his
contemporaries. But where political theorists had traditionally built
their ideas upon theological and ethical foundations, judging
institutions and rulers against a pattern of what ought to be,
Machiavelli affirmed that religion and morals had no place in the
political arena except insofar as they served political ends. For him,
the value of an institution or a ruler was to be determined only by
practical success, and, at least as far as The Prince is concerned,
success meant the acquisition and preservation of political power.
He regarded the ideas of his predecessors as mere “fancies.” “. . . I
depart from the rules set down by others,” he tells us in Chapter 15.
“But since it is my intention to write something of use . . . , I deem
it best to stick to the practical truth of things rather than to fancies.
Many men have imagined republics and principalities that never
really existed at all. Yet the way men live is so far removed from
the way they ought to live that anyone who abandons what is for
what should be pursues his downfall rather than his preservation.”

To be sure, history is replete with examples of rulers who, long
before Machiavelli appeared, had often acted without any regard
for ethical imperatives. But it remained for Machiavelli to affirm
that such actions were in accord with the legitimate principles of
political conduct. Without any theoretical sanction, these men had
not scrupled to predicate their actions upon purely political criteria.
Machiavelli provided the sanction their deeds—and those of
subsequent rulers—required by declaring in effect that if statecraft
was to be practiced successfully, conventional morality had to be

set aside and replaced by what later writers were to call “reasons of
state.” Thus he established a cleavage between political conduct
and personal morality—a cleavage that haunts the conscience of
men even to this day.

The modern reader should guard against the error of reading The
Prince as though its author had been aware of philosophical and
doctrinal systems relating to the state and society that had no
existence in his time. Unless he does so, he will seek for answers to
questions Machiavelli never considered. Indeed, it is important to
remember that Machiavelli was not a systematic thinker. He was
not concerned with the problem of rationalizing a complete and
coherent political theory. His aim in The Prince was to describe the
rules of power politics based upon his analysis of history—an
analysis which, whatever its shortcomings, marked a long step
forward in making sense out of the welter of conflicting events in
his time. It has since helped in making sense out of those of
subsequent times as well.

One of the most characteristic elements of his thought in this work
is its proximity to action. He was not a scholar, and he did not have
the temperament of one who finds knowledge an end in itself.
Knowledge for him was a springboard for the deed. He doubtless
regarded his analysis of men and events as the basis for a program,
a blueprint which some likely ruler would take up and build upon.
This aim helps to account for the fact that, surprisingly, he does not
even pause to define the nature of the state or to develop what its
relation to the society living under its laws should be. It also helps
to account for his insistence upon logic and his air of scientific
objectivity. He must have believed that he was not presenting the
opinions of a mere expert, but that he had unlocked the very truth
of things and was proclaiming that alone.

The skeptical reader will discover that Machiavelli's argument is
neither as logical nor as consistent as it appears, and that the
objectivity, though it is not just a pose, is not always real either. He
will discover that the work is not purely a synthesis of keen and
original deductions from fact. It is also a work of imagination.
Where the author's own logic might have led him to despair for his
country, his imagination stepped in, metaphor in hand, to reverse
the direction of that logic and give life to his hope (a hope which is
not fully revealed until the last chapter). Contrary to what some of
his critics have said, The Prince is not the work of a man whose
veins ran ice water. Instead, it is the work of a man who looked out
upon the wreckage of history with anguish in his heart and insisted
that a solution—not one that would emerge in the fullness of time,
but now—could be found. Such a solution would require desperate
measures, strength, courage, skill, and favorable circumstances—in
two words, virtú and fortuna.

He must have believed that the man and the moment were at hand
when, not long before his letter to Vettori in which he announced
The Prince, he saw a chance to return to his proper sphere of action
—politics. More than that, he saw a chance to play a leading role in
the creation of a state based upon his own ideas—a state large and
strong enough to be feared by its neighbors and to serve as a
bulwark against foreign incursions. For he had got wind that Pope
Leo X was planning to carve out a state for one of his nephews,
either Giuliano or Lorenzo de' Medici. Thus, perhaps in July, 1513,
he set himself to write The Prince. Working in haste, he probably
completed it by the following December, since he stated in the
letter to Vettori quoted above that it only needed to be “fattened
and polished.”

But The Prince, as we have it, does not show any great labor of the
file, and this, strangely, is one of its virtues. Free of rhetorical
flourishes, the style lays bare the mind at work, a mind impatient of
all nuances and shadings of thought, but poised for irony and quick
with sarcasm. Lively and ductile, it is irresistibly attracted to sharp
antitheses, aphorisms, and half-concealed images. The pace is
hurried, and indeed at times the writer's pen seems in danger of
losing its battle to keep up with the headlong rush of ideas as clause
follows upon clause. As a consequence, the syntax does not always
flow smoothly, and even the grammar becomes shaky. Yet these are
only minor flaws. Lacking grace, the expression nevertheless
remains lucid, even if we sometimes wish that the diction were
more precise and the pace more restrained. Whenever possible, the
writer adheres to a simple pattern: every argument unfolds a lesson
and comes to rest upon a political axiom, often new and always, in
his view, incontrovertible. All in all, the style is in accord with the
shape and temper of Machiavelli's thought.

But there is an appeal to the book that goes beyond the brilliance of
its ideas and the vigor of its style. Time has dimmed some of the
sparkle of its originality, and the modern reader is obliged to
summon his historical imagination if he is to recapture the sense of
shock and novelty which Machiavelli's first readers experienced.
But time has not dimmed its direct and uncompromising honesty,
its almost ruthless avoidance of every form of cant. Here there is no
bowing to pious clichés, to pretended sensibilities, or hallowed
euphemisms. Seldom has a writer done so little to ease the way for
his ideas. And one may wonder, in fact, whether those who have
reacted to Machiavelli with such voluble horror have not been
more shocked by his candor than by the character of the ruler he
describes.

On the whole, The Discourses Upon the First Ten Books of Titus
Livy is another matter. As already suggested, this is the work in
which Machiavelli fully reveals those republican sympathies that
have led some critics to doubt his sincerity in The Prince (but in
fact the same sympathies are more than hinted at there). Though
the question cannot be discussed here at length, certain differences
of aim which, incidentally, help to bridge the irreconcilable gulf
between the two works should be mentioned. The Prince was
intended to provide a drastic solution to contemporary political ills.
The Discourses, on the other hand, was intended to provide an
evaluation of the institutions of republican Rome, institutions
which Machiavelli—typical man of the Renaissance that he was—
tended to idealize. Moreover, the one focuses upon the means of
acquiring or founding a state, while the other focuses upon the
means of preserving it. It may be that Machiavelli saw the program
he set down in The Prince as a necessary preliminary step to the
ultimate establishment of the republican state he favored. But it
may be also that he thought the society of his day—very different
from that of ancient Rome—was too soft and corrupt to sustain the
sort of government he really desired. Yet it cannot be denied that
The Discourses presents a far more generous view of human nature
than does The Prince, even though the same ideas concerning the
relation of personal morality to political morality appear in both.
The “hero” of The Prince, it must be remembered, is a ruthless
despot, while the “hero” of The Discourses is the people of ancient
Rome—“my Romans,” as Machiavelli called them.

Not long after beginning The Discourses, Machiavelli set them
aside to write The Prince for reasons already mentioned; then he
took up The Discourses again and continued to make additions
until about 1519. He seems to have been in no hurry to finish them.

This is evident from their more leisurely pace, their more casual
organization, and their rather frequent repetitions of argument.

The individual selections from that lengthy work which appear in
this volume were chosen primarily on the basis of two criteria—for
their representative qualities and for the contrasts they provide to
the ideas developed in The Prince. Those dealing largely with
military problems, however, have been omitted entirely, since they
are not likely to be of interest to the modern reader. On the other
hand, representative discourses setting forth Machiavelli's views
concerning religion and his views concerning republics have been
included. Thus the volume may fairly claim to include all that is
vital and characteristic in Machiavelli's political thought.

In making this translation, accuracy has been the primary objective,
but I have also sought to preserve Machiavelli's mode of expression
insofar as the demands of fidelity and clarity allowed. For the
Italian text I have used the edition of Mario Bonfantini (Niccoló
Machiavelli: Opere, Milano, 1954). It bears repeating that
Machiavelli's ideas grew directly out of his consideration of
specific historical events, and for that reason the reader must know
what those events were. The Notes aim primarily to satisfy that
need.

Daniel Donno

The Prince

Niccolò Machiavelli to the Magnificent Lorenzo de'

Medici1

THOSE WHO wish to win favor with a prince customarily offer him those
things which they hold most precious or which they see him most delight
in. Very often, therefore, we see princes presented with horses, weapons,
cloth of gold, precious gems, or similar ornaments worthy of their
greatness. Wishing, then, to present myself to Your Highness with some
mark of my duty to you, I have been unable to find anything I possess that I
hold so dear or esteem so highly as my knowledge of the actions of great
men, learned from long experience in modern affairs and from constant
reading of ancient ones. Having long examined and reflected upon these
matters with great diligence and having now set them down in a small
volume, I send it to Your Highness. Though I judge this work unworthy to
be presented to you, nevertheless, I am very confident that, because of your
benevolence, you will accept it, considering that there can come no greater
gift from me than the means to understand in a very short time all that
which I, after many years, through many labors and dangers, have come to
know and understand. I have not adorned this work with fine phrases, with
swelling, pompous words, or with any of those blandishments or external
ornaments with which many set forth and decorate their matter. For I have
chosen either that nothing at all should bring it honor or that the variety of
its material and the gravity of its subject matter alone should make it
welcome. Nor do I wish it thought a presumption that a man of low and
poor estate dare consider and set forth regulations for the rule of princes.
For as those who draw landscapes set themselves on the plain to examine
the character of hills and of high places and set themselves on the summits
to examine the lowlands, so in order thoroughly to understand the nature of
the populace one must be a prince, and in order thoroughly to understand
the nature of a prince one must be of the people. Therefore, may Your

Highness accept this little gift in the spirit with which I send it. If you will
diligently read and consider it, you will detect in it one of my deepest
desires, which is that you will come to that greatness which fortune and
your own qualities promise you. And if from your great height Your
Highness will sometimes cast a glance below to these lowly places, you will

see how undeservedly I endure the heavy and relentless malice of fortune.2

Chapter 1

The Kinds of Principalities and the Means by

Which They Are Acquired

ALL STATES and all dominions that hold and have held power over men
have been and are either republics or principalities. Principalities are either
hereditary, in which case the family of the ruler has long been in power, or
they are new. The new ones are either entirely new, as Milan was to

Francesco Sforza,1 or they are, so to speak, members added to the
hereditary possession of the prince who acquires them, as the Kingdom of

Naples is to the King of Spain.2 The dominions thus acquired have been
accustomed either to live under a prince or to be free; and they are acquired

either by fortune or by ability.3

Hereditary Principalities

I SHALL exclude any discussion of republics, having discussed them at

length elsewhere.1 I shall consider principalities alone and, following the
indicated plan, shall discuss how they may be governed and preserved.

I say, then, that hereditary states accustomed to the family of their ruler

are more easily kept than new ones, because it is sufficient if the prince
does not abandon the methods of his ancestors and proves adaptable when
unforeseen events occur. In this way a prince of ordinary capability will
always keep his state unless he is deprived of it by an exceptional or
exceedingly powerful force. If he is once deprived of it, however, he will
nevertheless regain it at the slightest adversity that the conqueror
encounters.

In Italy we have the example of the Duke of Ferrara, who was able to

sustain the assaults of the Venetians in 1484 and those of Pope Julius in
1510 for no other reason than that he had been long established in that

dominion.2 The hereditary prince has less cause and less need to offend
than a new one. Hence it follows that he is more readily loved. If unusual
vices do not make him hated, it is reasonable to suppose that his subjects
will feel a natural affection for him. Furthermore, one change always leaves

dentations upon which to build another,3 but in a long and continuous rule
the recollection of changes and of their causes tends to be forgotten.

Mixed Principalities

IN A new principality, however, there are difficulties. To begin with, if it is
not entirely new, but an added member so to speak (the old and the new
together being called a mixed principality), changes of authority come
about from a natural hazard which exists in all new principalities: that is,
from the willingness of men to change one lord for another, believing thus
to improve their lot. For this reason they take arms against their ruler; but in
this they deceive themselves, for experience will prove that they will
actually have worsened their lot. This in turn will be the result of another
common and natural necessity, for by the presence of his soldiers and by
those other innumerable offenses that follow upon conquest, the new ruler
must inevitably distress those over whom he establishes his rule. So it
happens that he makes enemies of all those whom he has injured in
occupying the new principality, and yet he cannot keep the friendship of
those who have set him up; for he cannot satisfy them as they had expected
and, since he is obligated to them, he cannot use strong medicine against
them. Even if one has a very strong army, he will always need the good will
of the inhabitants when entering a province. For these reasons Louis XII,
King of France, quickly occupied Milan and quickly lost it. Ludovico's own
forces were enough to take it from him the first time because those people
who had opened the gates to the King, finding themselves deceived in their
opinions and in their expectations, could not endure the irritations inflicted

by their new ruler.1

It is indeed true, however, that after one has conquered a rebellious

territory a second time, it will be less easily lost, for the ruler, using the
rebellion as his excuse, will be the less reluctant to establish himself solidly
by punishing defectors, uncovering suspects, and strengthening his position
wherever it is weak. Therefore, to have the King of France lose Milan the
first time, a Duke Ludovico threatening the borders was sufficient; to lose it
a second time, the opposition of the whole world, together with the defeat

and the expulsion of the King's army from Italy, was needed.2 This came
about for the above-mentioned reasons. Nevertheless, he did lose it both the
first and second time. The general reasons for the first loss have been
treated. It remains to speak of the second, and to consider what remedies the
King of France had and did not use, and what remedies another in the same
situation could have availed himself of in order to keep such a conquest.

I say, therefore, that these conquered states which are joined to a state

already long held by the conqueror may either belong to the same region
and have the same language, or they may not. When they do, it is very easy
to keep them, especially if they are not accustomed to freedom. To hold
them securely, it is enough to have extinguished the line of princes who
ruled them formerly and to maintain the pre-existent conditions. When there
is no distinction of custom, men will live quietly, as happened in Burgundy,
Brittany, Gascony, and Normandy, which have long been a part of France.
Though there is some distinction of language among them, the customs are
nevertheless alike, and the people can easily get along with each other.
Anyone who conquers such territories and wishes to hold on to them must
do two things: the first is to extinguish the ruling family; the second is to
alter neither the laws nor the taxes. Thus in a short time they will become
one with the conqueror's original possessions.

But when one acquires states in a province where the language, the

customs, and the laws are different, there are difficulties; here both fortune
and great ability are needed to keep them. One of the best and most ready
solutions is for the new ruler to reside there. This expedient would make the
new possession safer and more lasting, as it did for the Turk in the case of

Greece.3 Despite all other measures taken to hold that state, he would have

been unable to keep it unless he had gone there to live. Being on the spot,
one may observe disorders as they arise and quell them quickly; not being
present, one will learn about them only when they have assumed such
proportions that they cannot be quelled. Moreover, the new province is not
despoiled by the ruler's officials. The subjects are satisfied that they have
ready recourse to the prince. Consequently, they have more reason to love
him if they choose to be good, and more reason to fear him if they choose to
behave otherwise. A foreign enemy, thinking of attacking such a state,
would be likely to show more respect, for a resident prince could only be
defeated with great difficulty.

The next best solution is to send colonies to one or two places which

could serve to shackle that state. It is necessary either to do this or to keep a
large force of cavalry and infantry there. Colonies do not cost much.
Without expense, or with little, they may be sent out and maintained, and
they will harm only those whose fields and houses they appropriate for their
own use—a minimal part of the population. Those who are harmed, being
dispersed and poor, can cause no trouble. All the rest, on the one hand, will
be left unharmed (and hence should remain quiet); and, on the other hand,
will be fearful lest by some wrongdoing the same that happened to those
who were deprived should happen to them. To conclude, such colonies are
not costly, are very loyal, and do little harm; those who are hurt, as already
indicated, cannot annoy because they are poor and dispersed. At this point
one may note that men must be either pampered or annihilated. They
avenge light offenses; they cannot avenge severe ones; hence, the harm one
does to a man must be such as to obviate any fear of revenge. In any case,
by maintaining soldiers instead of colonies, a prince will spend much more,
since he will have to use the entire revenue of the state to protect it. Thus
the acquisition will become a loss. This method is also more harmful
because it annoys the entire state as the troops are moved from one lodging
to another. Everyone will feel the disruption and become an enemy—an
enemy who can be troublesome because, though beaten, he is ever at home.
From every point of view, therefore, this kind of protection is just as useless
as colonies are useful.

Moreover, a prince who occupies a province which, as previously

described, differs from his own, must become the leader and defender of the
less powerful neighboring states and seek to weaken the more powerful
among them. He must also be on guard lest by any chance some foreigner
equal to him in power should enter them. Such an event always comes
about through the help of discontented inhabitants who willingly admit a
foreign power either through excessive ambition or through fear, as was the

case with the Etolians, who admitted the Romans into Greece.4 So it was
also with every province that the Romans entered: they were brought in by
the inhabitants themselves. It is in the nature of things that as soon as a
powerful foreigner enters a province, all the weaker powers in it will
become his allies through envy of those who have been ruling over them.
This is so true that, with respect to minor powers, the invader need do
nothing at all to win them, for they will all willingly merge in the state
which he has acquired. He has but to see to it that they do not gain too
much strength and authority. With his own forces and their support, he can
very early reduce the stronger powers and then become arbiter of the entire
province. Any ruler who does not succeed in doing this will soon lose what
he has won, or so long as he does manage to hold it, will have a host of
difficulties and annoyances. The Romans very carefully observed this
policy in the provinces they conquered. They sent out colonies; they
protected the lesser powers without increasing their strength; they reduced
those who were strong, and they did not permit powerful foreigners to gain
a footing. Their conduct in Greece will suffice as an example: there the
Romans protected the Achaeans and the Etolians, reduced the kingdom of
the Macedonians, and expelled Antiochus. Nor did they ever reward the
Achaeans and the Etolians by allowing them to enlarge their states, or allow
Philip to persuade them to become his friends until they had weakened

him.5 Nor did the power of Antiochus ever induce them to permit his
keeping any part of Greece. In this instance the Romans did everything that
wise princes should do who must have regard not only for existing
disorders but for future ones as well, avoiding them with all possible
diligence. By making provision in advance, princes may easily avoid such
difficulties; but if they wait until they are near at hand, the medicine will
not be in time, for by then the malady will have become incurable. In this

matter the situation is the same as physicians report concerning hectic fever:
in the beginning the disease is easy to cure but hard to diagnose; with the
passage of time, having gone unrecognized and unmedicated, it becomes
easy to diagnose but hard to cure. So it is with a state: when ills are
recognized in advance (and only the prudent can do this), they are quickly
cured. But when, having gone unrecognized, they are allowed to increase
until everyone may recognize them, then remedy is no longer possible.

Thus the Romans, foreseeing difficulties, always remedied them. And

they never allowed them to persist in order to avoid a war, for they knew
that wars cannot be avoided and can only be deferred to the advantage of
others. Therefore they chose to go to war against Philip and Antiochus in
Greece in order to avoid having to deal with them in Italy. For the time,
they could have avoided both dangers, but they chose not to. Nor were they
ever pleased with the sort of advice that is always on the lips of our present-

day wise men: that is, to enjoy the benefits of time.6 Instead, they were
pleased to use their strength and prudence. For time bears all things out and
may produce good as readily as evil, evil as readily as good.

But let us turn to France and consider whether she has done any of the

things mentioned; and I will speak not of Charles but of Louis.7 Since
Louis held possessions in Italy for a longer time, it is easier to examine his
proceedings; and you will see that he did the contrary of what one should
do in order to hold power in a state different from one's own.

King Louis was brought into Italy through the ambitions of the

Venetians, who hoped by his coming to gain half of Lombardy.8 I do not
mean to censure King Louis's decision in this matter, for having chosen to
set foot in Italy and having no friends here—indeed, all gates being closed

against him because of King Charles's conduct9—he was compelled to
accept what friendship he could. This wise plan would have succeeded if he
had not made errors in other matters. Having taken Lombardy, he quickly
regained all the influence which Charles had lost: Genoa submitted, the
Florentines became his allies; the Marquis of Mantua, the Duke of Ferrara,
the Bentivogli, the Countess of Forlí, the Lords of Faenza, Pesaro, Rimini,

Camerino, and Piombino, the Lucchese, Pisans, and Sienese—all came
forward to offer their friendship. The Venetians could then wonder at the
rashness of their decision. To acquire a couple of towns in Lombardy, they
had made King Louis master over a third of Italy.

Let us now consider how easily the King could have preserved his

influence in Italy if he had followed the rules set forth above and protected
all his friends who, since they were numerous and weak and afraid—some
of the Church, others of the Venetians—were compelled to stay loyal to
him. By keeping their support, he could easily have been secure against
those who remained strong. But scarcely had he gained Milan when he did

the contrary in assisting Pope Alexander to occupy Romagna.10 And he did
not realize that in taking this step he was making himself weak by casting
off his friends and those who had leaped to his protection, while he was
making the Church strong by adding temporal power to the spiritual power
which gives it so much authority. Having made an initial error, he was
obliged to make still others. Indeed, to put an end to Pope Alexander's
ambitions, and to prevent his becoming lord of Tuscany he was forced to

come into Italy himself.11 Nor did it suffice him to have strengthened the
Church and cast off his friends. In order to gain Naples, he divided it with

the King of Spain.12 Thus, whereas he had been sole arbiter of Italy, he
now brought in a partner, so that all those who had ambitions and were
displeased with him could have someone to turn to. And whereas he could
have left a king in Naples who would have been his pensionary, he removed

him in order to install one who could remove the French king himself.13

It is truly a natural and ordinary thing to desire gain; and when those who

can succeed attempt it, they will always be praised and not blamed. But if
they cannot succeed, yet try anyway, they are guilty of error and are
blameworthy. Therefore, if France with her own forces could have attacked
Naples, she should have done so; if not, she should not have partitioned it.
If she is to be excused for having partitioned Lombardy with the Venetians
because she thereby gained a foothold in Italy, this second partitioning
merits censure since it cannot be excused by the same necessity.

Louis thus made these five mistakes: he extinguished the weaker powers;

he strengthened one that was already strong in Italy; he brought in a most

potent foreign power;14 he did not come and reside here; and he failed to
establish colonies. Yet these errors could not have hurt him while he lived if

he had not committed a sixth, that of reducing the power of Venice.15 If he
had not strengthened the Church nor brought the power of Spain into Italy,
it would have been reasonable and necessary to reduce her; but having
taken both these actions, he should never have permitted Venice's ruin. For,
being strong, Venice could have kept others from venturing into Lombardy,
since she would never have agreed to their doing so unless she herself could
become mistress there, and no one would have seized it from France merely
to yield it to Venice in turn. Moreover, no one would have dared to attack
both France and Venice at the same time. If anyone says King Louis ceded
Romagna to Pope Alexander and the Kingdom of Naples to Spain to avoid
a war, I answer with the reasons set forth above—that one should never
permit a disorder to persist in order to avoid a war, for war is not avoided
thereby but merely deferred to one's own disadvantage. And if others allege
the reason for this to have been the promise Louis made to the Pope to
undertake the invasion of Romagna in exchange for the dissolution of his
marriage and a cardinal's cap for Rouen, I reply with what I shall set forth
below concerning the promises of princes and how they ought to be kept.

King Louis, therefore, lost Lombardy because he failed to observe any of

those rules observed by others who, having conquered provinces, chose to
keep them. Nor is this to be wondered at, but is very ordinary and
reasonable. I spoke about this matter with the Cardinal of Rouen at Nantes
when Valentino (for so Cesare Borgia, the son of Pope Alexander, was
popularly called) occupied Romagna. When the Cardinal of Rouen told me
that the Italians did not understand war, I answered that the French did not
understand politics; for if they had understood, they would not have
allowed the Church to gain so much in power. And experience has shown
that the greatness both of the Church and of Spain in Italy was brought
about by France, while France's ruin was, in turn, brought about by them.
From this we may extract a general rule which scarcely ever fails: He who
causes another to become powerful ruins himself, for he brings such a

power into being either by design or by force, and both of these elements
are suspect to the one whom he has made powerful.

Why Alexander's Successors Were Able to Keep
Possession of Darius' Kingdom after Alexander's

Death

CONSIDERING THE difficulties involved in keeping a newly acquired
state, one may wonder how it happened that the Asiatic lands which
Alexander the Great conquered in but a few years and occupied only briefly

before his death did not rebel, as might have been expected.1 Yet the fact is
that his successors did manage to hold on to them, and had no difficulty
doing so except such as arose among themselves through personal

ambition.2 The answer is that all principalities for which some record exists
have been ruled in two different ways: either by a single prince aided by
servants functioning as ministers and governing by his favor and
concession; or by a prince with barons holding title not by his grace but by
right of inheritance. The barons have dominions and subjects of their own
who are bound to them by natural affections and regard them as their lords.
In states which are governed by a prince and his servants, the prince has
greater authority because no one in his land recognizes anyone but him as
master. And if anyone does give obedience to another, he only does so as to
a minister for whom he feels no tie of affection.

Examples of these two ways of governing in our day are Turkey and

France. The whole Kingdom of Turkey is governed by one man; everyone

else is his servant. Having divided his kingdom into sanjaks,3 the monarch

sends various administrators out to them, shifting them about and replacing
them as he pleases. But the King of France is surrounded by a large number
of lords of ancient lineage who are recognized and loved by their subjects.
They have their degrees of pre-eminence, which the king cannot deprive
them of without danger to himself. Anyone who considers both these states,
therefore, will note that there would be difficulty in conquering the
kingdom of the Turks, but ease in keeping it once it was conquered. He will
note, on the other hand, that the Kingdom of France in some respects would
be easier to occupy but more difficult to hold.

The difficulty of occupying the kingdom of the Turks arises from the fact

that there is no possibility of being called in by princes of that kingdom and
no hope of being assisted by a revolt on the part of those surrounding the
ruler. This is the consequence of the above-mentioned factors. For since all
such persons are servants and dependents of their ruler, they can be
corrupted only with great difficulty; and even if they were corrupted they
would prove of little use because, for reasons already given, they would be
unable to draw the populace after them. Anyone who attacks the Turks
must, therefore, expect to find them entirely united, and would do well to
rely upon his own forces rather than upon the disorder of the enemy. But if
the Turk were beaten in the field and were so thoroughly routed that he
could not reassemble his armies, there would be no cause for concern
except for the family of the ruler; and if this were extinguished, there would
be no one left to fear at all, since any others would have no standing among
the people. Even as the conqueror could not rely upon them before his
victory, so he need not fear them after it.

The contrary is true in monarchies governed as France is, for you can

enter them with ease by winning over one of the barons of the kingdom,
since malcontents and others who desire a change can always be found. For
the reasons stated, such persons can open the way for you and facilitate
your victory. But in preserving it afterward infinite difficulties will arise in
regard to both those who have helped you and those whom you have
oppressed. Nor will it suffice to extinguish the ruler's family, for nobles
capable of mounting new insurrections will remain. Unable either to please

them or to annihilate them, you will lose the state at the first likely
opportunity.

Now, if you consider the nature of Darius' government you will find it

similar to that of the Turkish monarchy. Therefore it was necessary that
Alexander make an all-out attack and deprive Darius of the field. After this
victory, Darius then being dead, the state remained securely in Alexander's
hands, for the reasons already given. And his successors, had they remained
united, could have enjoyed it in ease. Nor did any tumults arise in that
kingdom except those which they themselves caused. But it is not so easy to
keep possession of states which are organized as France is. This explains
how it happened that there were so many insurrections against the Romans
in Spain, France, and Greece resulting from the numerous principalities into

which those states had been divided.4 As long as the memory of these
principalities survived, the Romans remained insecure in their possessions.
Not until the enduring power of the empire had effaced all memory of them
did the Romans become safely entrenched. Thereafter, even when fighting
among themselves, each of the Roman leaders was able to gain the support
of some part of these provinces, according to the degree of authority he held
in them; and once the line of the ancestral rulers had become extinct, the
people recognized none but Romans as their masters. Therefore, all these
things having been considered, no one should marvel at the ease with which
Alexander kept possession of Asia or at the difficulties which others, like

Pyrrhus and many more, had in preserving their conquests.5 The difference
does not arise from the greater or lesser ability of the conqueror, but from
dissimilarities in the conquered lands.

How to Govern Cities and Principalities That, Prior
to Being Occupied, Lived Under Their Own Laws

WHEN A state accustomed to live in freedom under its own laws is

acquired, there are three ways of keeping it: the first is to destroy it;1 the
second is to go to live there in person; the third is to let it continue to live
under its own laws, taking tribute from it, and setting up a government
composed of a few men who will keep it friendly to you. Such a
government, being the creature of the prince, will be aware that it cannot
survive without his friendship and support, and it will do everything to
maintain his authority. A city which is used to freedom is more easily
controlled by means of its own citizens than by any other, provided one
chooses not to destroy it.

Take, for example, the Spartans and the Romans. The Spartans held

Athens and Thebes by setting up a government of a few men in each;

nevertheless they lost both.2 In order to hold on to Capua, Carthage, and

Numantia, the Romans destroyed them; yet they did not lose them.3 They
hoped to hold Greece in almost the same way as the Spartans had done,
leaving her free under her own laws; yet they were not successful, and so
they were compelled to destroy many cities of that province in order to keep

possession of it.4

For in truth there is no sure method of holding such cities except by

destruction. Anyone who becomes master of a city accustomed to freedom
and does not destroy it may expect to be destroyed by it; for such a city may
always justify rebellion in the name of liberty and its ancient institutions.
These are not forgotten either through passage of time or through benefits
received. Despite any actions or provisions one may take, if the inhabitants
are not divided and dispersed, they will not forget that name and those
institutions, and they will quickly have recourse to them at every chance, as

Pisa did after a hundred years of servitude under the Florentines.5

But when cities or provinces have been accustomed to live under a prince

and his line becomes extinct, being on the one hand used to obeying and on
the other deprived of their leader, they cannot agree among themselves in
the selection of a new one and do not know how to live in freedom. Hence
they are slower to take up arms, and a prince may more easily win them and
hold them. But in republics there is greater vigor, greater hatred, greater
desire for revenge, and the memory of earlier freedom cannot and will not
let them rest. Thus, the surest procedure is either to destroy them or to live
in them.

Concerning New Principalities Acquired by One's

Own Arms and Ability

LET NO one wonder if in the discussion that follows concerning new
princes in newly established states I shall set forth some very outstanding
examples. Men almost always walk in paths beaten by others and act by
imitation. Though he cannot hold strictly to the ways of others or match the
ability of those he imitates, a prudent man must always tread the path of
great men and imitate those who have excelled, so that even if his ability
does not match theirs, at least he will achieve some semblance of it. He
should act like a prudent archer who, knowing the limitation of his bow and
judging the target to be too far off, sets his aim still farther off, not to strike
so distant a mark, but rather to strike the desired target through the more
ambitious aim.

I say, therefore, that the degree of difficulty which a newly risen prince in

a newly founded state encounters will depend upon the degree of ability he
possesses. And since his rise from private citizen to prince presupposes
either ability or good fortune, it would appear that one or the other of these

factors will in part reduce his difficulties.1 Those who have relied least
upon fortune, however, have been the most successful. The prince's
difficulties should also be reduced by the fact that, having no other
dominions, he will be obliged to live in the new state.

But to come to those who have become princes through ability rather

than good fortune, I say that the most outstanding were Moses, Cyrus,

Romulus, Theseus, and the like.2 And though one should not mention
Moses, because he was the mere executor of things commanded by God,
still he deserves admiration if only for that divine grace which made him
worthy to speak with God. But let us consider Cyrus and others who
conquered and founded kingdoms. They were all admirable; and if their
particular actions and methods are considered, they will not seem
discordant with those of Moses, who had so great a Preceptor. Examining
their lives and actions, one cannot find that they owed anything to fortune
but the opportunity which gave them matter to shape into the form they
thought right. Without an opportunity, their abilities would have been
wasted, and without their abilities, the opportunity would have arisen in
vain.

Therefore it was needful that Moses find the people of Israel enslaved

and oppressed by the Egyptians in order that they would be ready to follow
him out of Egypt to escape from servitude. It was needful that Romulus be
taken out of Alba and exposed at birth in order that he could become King
of Rome and founder of that nation. It was needful that Cyrus find the
Persians dissatisfied with the rule of the Medes, and find the Medes soft and
effeminate as a result of prolonged peace. Theseus would have been unable
to display his ability if he had not found the Athenians scattered. These
opportunities, then, gave these men the chance they needed, and their great
abilities made them recognize it. As a result, their countries were ennobled
and made prosperous.

Those who become princes by virtue of their abilities, as these men did,

acquire dominion with difficulty but maintain it with ease. The difficulties
they encounter in winning their dominions arise in part from the new forms
of administration and new methods which they are compelled to introduce
in order to establish their state and assure their security. It must be realized
that there is nothing more difficult to plan, more uncertain of success, or
more dangerous to manage than the establishment of a new order of
government; for he who introduces it makes enemies of all those who
derived advantage from the old order and finds but lukewarm defenders

among those who stand to gain from the new one. Such a lukewarm attitude
grows partly out of fear of the adversaries, who have the law on their side,
and partly from the incredulity of men in general, who actually have no
faith in new things until they have been proved by experience. Hence it
happens that whenever those in the enemy camp have a chance to attack,
they do so with partisan fervor, while the others defend themselves rather
passively, so that both they and the prince are endangered.

To treat the matter thoroughly, however, it is necessary to consider

whether such innovators stand on their own or whether they depend upon
others; that is, whether in order to fulfill their mission they must plead or
can compel. When the first is the case, it always happens that matters turn
out badly and they achieve nothing. But when they depend upon their own
resources and can use force, they rarely fail. From this it follows that all
armed prophets have succeeded and all unarmed ones have failed; for in
addition to what has already been said, people are by nature changeable. It
is easy to persuade them about some particular matter, but it is hard to hold
them to that persuasion. Hence it is necessary to provide that when they no
longer believe, they can be forced to believe.

Moses, Cyrus, Theseus, and Romulus would have been unable to have

their constitutions obeyed for so long a time if they had been unarmed, as
was the case in our own day with Fra' Girolamo Savonarola, who failed

with his new laws as soon as the multitude no longer believed in them.3 He
had no way to keep them faithful to what they had believed, or to force the
unbelievers to believe. Therefore, such men encounter great difficulties; but
the dangers arise on their way to power, and they must use their
resourcefulness to overcome them. Once they have overcome them,
however, and have begun to be venerated and, moreover, have suppressed
all those of their own rank who had been jealous of them, they will remain
powerful, secure, honored, and successful.

To such lofty examples I wish to add a lesser one that will nevertheless

share some measure of proportion with them; and let this suffice for all

similar instances. I mean Hiero of Syracuse.4 From private citizen, he

became Lord of Syracuse. Yet he owed nothing to fortune but the
opportunity, for when the Syracusans were oppressed, they elected him
their captain, and from that he earned the right to become their ruler. He
possessed such remarkable ability that even as a private person it was said

of him that he lacked nothing but a kingdom to be a king.5 He destroyed the
old militia and established a new one; he abandoned old alliances and
formed new ones. Having his own soldiers and allies, he was thus able to
build as he chose upon this foundation, so that although he exerted great
effort to achieve his position, it required little to keep it.

Concerning New Principalities Acquired with the

Arms and Fortunes of Others

THOSE WHO rise from private station to become princes by means of
good fortune alone do so with scant effort but remain so with much toil.
They encounter no difficulty on the way, for they fly to their destinations;
and all their difficulties begin when they have alighted. Such cases arise
when someone is given a state either for money or as a favor from the
bestower, as happened to many in the Greek cities of Ionia and the
Hellespont when Darius made them princes so that they would hold those

cities for his glory and security,1 and as also happened to those who from

private citizens became emperors by corrupting the military.2

Such individuals depend entirely upon the will and the fortune—two

fickle and unstable things— of those who have installed them. They lack
both the knowledge and the means to keep their position. They lack the
knowledge because, barring the possibility that they are men of exceptional
intelligence and skill, they are unlikely to know how to command, since
they have always been private citizens. They lack the means because they
have no forces upon whose loyalty and good will they can depend.
Moreover, like all things in nature that spring up and grow quickly, states
that come hastily into being cannot have proper roots and branches; so the
first adverse weather destroys them unless, as I have said, those who so
suddenly become princes have the rare ability to learn quickly how to

preserve what fortune has dropped in their laps and begin to lay those
foundations which others have laid before becoming princes.

With respect to both these ways of becoming a prince—that is, through

ability or through fortune—I want to set down two examples that occurred

within present memory, namely Francesco Sforza and Cesare Borgia.3 By
suitable means and by his own remarkable ability, Francesco rose from
private station to become Duke of Milan, and what he gained with a
thousand troubles he preserved with little effort. On the other hand, Cesare
Borgia, popularly called Duke Valentino, acquired power through his
father's fortunes and lost it through the same means, despite the fact that he
exerted every effort and did everything that a prudent and capable man
should do to entrench himself in those territories which the arms and
fortunes of others had granted him. For, as was said before, if one has
unusual ability and does not lay the foundations beforehand, he can lay
them afterward, though with trouble for the architect and danger to the
edifice. If all of Duke Valentino's operations are considered, therefore, it
will be clear that he laid strong foundations for his future power; and I do
not think it would be superfluous to discuss them, for I know of no better
precept to bestow upon a new prince than that he follow the example of his
actions. If his methods proved of no avail he was not to blame, for his

failure resulted from the extraordinary and extreme malice of fortune.4

Wishing to make his son the Duke great, Alexander VI faced many

immediate and future difficulties. He saw first of all that there was no way
of making him lord of any state not belonging to the Church, and he saw
that if he attempted to bestow any of those belonging to the Church upon
him, the Duke of Milan and the Venetians would restrain him because

Faenza and Rimini were already under the protection of the Venetians.5 He
saw besides that the military forces of Italy, especially those that could have
been useful to him, were in the hands of men who had reason to fear the
papal power, and therefore could not be trusted. They were all controlled by

the Orsini, the Colonnesi, and their accomplices.6 Consequently, it was
necessary to upset the existing arrangements and, by introducing disorder
among the Italian states, acquire secure possession of some of them. This

was easy to do, for the Pope saw that the Venetians, moved by other
considerations, were arranging to have the French re-enter Italy, a scheme
which, far from opposing, he facilitated by dissolving Louis's first

marriage.7

Thus King Louis came into Italy with the help of the Venetians and the

consent of Alexander, and he had scarcely entered Milan before Alexander
had from him the forces he needed for his venture in Romagna, which he
was allowed to undertake by virtue of the King's great prestige. Having thus

acquired Romagna and subdued the Colonnesi,8 Duke Valentino wanted to
secure his conquests and embark upon others, but he found two obstacles in
his way: the first concerned the doubtful loyalty of his forces; the second
concerned the attitude of France. That is, he feared that the Orsini forces,
which he had employed, would deliberately fail him and not only impede
further conquest but also deprive him of what he had already gained; and he
feared that the King would do the same. With regard to the Orsini forces, he
got some indication of their state of mind when, after having seized Faenza,
he proceeded to advance upon Bologna and saw them turn cold in the

assault.9 As for the King, the Duke recognized his attitude when, having
taken the Duchy of Urbino and launched his attack upon Tuscany, he was

made to desist.10 The Duke thereupon decided he would no longer depend
upon the arms and fortunes of others.

The first thing he did then was to undermine the Orsini and Colonna

factions in Rome, bringing all their adherents of noble rank into his service
by assigning them generous provisions and by honoring them, according to
their degree, with military and administrative posts. As a result, in a few
months they forgot their former factional ties and became entirely loyal to
the Duke. After this, having already dispersed the leaders of the Colonna
clan, he sought for a chance to destroy those of the Orsini as well. The
chance when it came proved a good one, but his use of it proved even
better. For the Orsini, belatedly recognizing that the power of the Duke
combined with that of the Church spelled their ruin, called a meeting at La
Magione, near Perugia. Out of it came the revolt of Urbino, the disorders of

Romagna, and a host of perils for the Duke. But with the help of France he

overcame them all.11

When he had regained his former standing, he decided that in order to

avoid risk he would no longer rely upon France or upon the forces of

anyone else.12 He resorted to deception instead, and he knew so well how
to dissimulate that the Orsini clan patched up their differences with him
through the mediation of Paolo Orsini, toward whom the Duke extended
every courtesy, granting him gifts of money, of robes and horses in order to
win his confidence. Such was their folly that it led them into his hands at

Senigallia.13 Having suppressed these leaders and made allies of their
followers, the Duke now had the sound foundations he needed for the
establishment of his own power, since he controlled all of Romagna and the
Duchy of Urbino and, most important of all, had gained the good will of all
the inhabitants of Romagna, who were beginning to get a taste of good
government.

And since this last achievement is worthy of being noted and imitated, I

do not wish to pass it over. After the Duke had conquered Romagna, he saw
that it had been ruled by impotent lords who had been more inclined to
despoil than to govern their subjects, and who had given more cause for
disunity than unity, so that the province was ravaged by brigandage, by
feuds, and by violence of every kind. Seeing the need for a sound
government that would reduce it to peace and order under his sovereign
authority, he appointed for this purpose Messer Remirro de Orca, a cruel
and resolute individual, to whom he granted the fullest powers. In a short
time this man brought peace and unity to the province, thereby gaining
great respect. Later, judging that such excessive power was no longer
necessary and fearing that it would arouse hatred, the Duke established a
civil tribunal in the center of the province, presided over by an outstanding
magistrate with a representative from each city. Recognizing that past
severities had generated a measure of hatred against him, he then
determined to free himself of all popular suspicion by demonstrating that if
there had been any acts of cruelty they had proceeded not from him but
from his minister instead. Having found an occasion to do this, one morning

he had Remirro's body, cut in two, placed on view in the public square of
Cesena with a wooden block and a blood-stained knife resting beside it. The
horror of that spectacle gave the people reason to be both shocked and
gratified.

But let us turn back to where we left off. I say, then, that when the Duke

found himself sufficiently powerful and in part safe from any immediate
dangers, because he was armed as he wished to be and had largely
eliminated such neighboring forces as might have attacked him, he found
that the only remaining obstacle to his further conquests was the King of

France who, having belatedly seen his error, would not tolerate them.14 For
this reason he began to seek out new allies and to waver in his relations
with the French with respect to their campaign in the Kingdom of Naples

where the Spanish were laying siege to Gaeta.15 His aim was to be free of
them, and he would have succeeded if Pope Alexander had not died. This
was his conduct concerning matters at hand.

Concerning the future, however, he had first of all to consider whether a

new successor to the papacy would be friendly to him and would not
attempt to deprive him of what Alexander had given him. On this point he
planned to assure his safety in four ways: first, by extinguishing the line of
all those lords he had despoiled, so as to deprive the new pope of any
chance to use them against him; second, by gaining the allegiance of all the
noblemen of Rome, as I said earlier, so as to use them to restrain the new
pope; third, by winning over as many members of the College of Cardinals
as possible; fourth, by acquiring enough power before Pope Alexander's
death so that he himself would be capable of resisting any initial attack
made against him by Alexander's successor. Of these four objectives, he had
achieved three when Alexander died, while the fourth was just short of
fulfillment. For he had slain as many of the lords he had despoiled as he
could get hold of, and very few had escaped. He had won over the Roman
nobility and could claim a very large portion of the College of Cardinals. As
to conquests, he had already laid plans for becoming lord of Tuscany, he
had already gained possession of both Perugia and Piombino, and he had
become the protector of Pisa.

And as soon as he no longer had to consider the wishes of France

(actually this was already the case, for the Spaniards had driven the French
out of the Kingdom of Naples under such circumstances that both France
and Spain needed his friendship), he intended to sweep into Pisa. After this,
Lucca and Siena would have quickly surrendered, partly through envy of
the Florentines, partly through fear. Then the Florentines would have been
helpless. If he had succeeded in this venture (and he would have succeeded
the very year Alexander died), he would have been able to manage for
himself, relying no longer upon the fortunes and arms of others, but upon
his own powers and ability instead. But Alexander died only five years after
the Duke had first drawn his sword. He was left with only the province of
Romagna consolidated, with everything else still up in the air, standing

between two very powerful armies, and deathly ill besides.16

Yet the Duke was endowed with so much fierceness of spirit, so much

ability, so much knowledge of how men are won or ruined, and had so
quickly laid down such firm foundations that if he had not been pressed by
the two armies and had been in good health he would have prevailed over
every difficulty. That his foundations were sound is clear from the fact that
Romagna waited more than a month for him to appear and that, although
only half alive, he could remain in Rome without danger. Even when the

Baglioni, the Vitelli, and the Orsini came to Rome,17 they could not raise a
force to attack him. Though he could not get his candidate elected pope,

still he could prevent anyone he did not want from being elected.18 But if
he had been in good health when Alexander died everything would have
been easy for him. He told me when Pope Julius II was elected that he had
foreseen everything that could happen at the time of his father's death and
had found a remedy for every contingency, but he had never expected that
at the same time he too would be near death.

Having reviewed all the Duke's actions, then, I see nothing to blame him

for. Indeed, I think he should be proposed—as in fact I have—as an
example to be imitated by all those who have come to power through the
fortunes and arms of others. Being of great spirit and lofty ambition, he
would have been unable to act in any other way. Only the suddenness of

Alexander's death coupled with his own illness thwarted his designs.
Therefore, if you are a prince in possession of a newly acquired state and
deem it necessary to guard against your enemies, to gain allies, to win either
by force or fraud, to be loved and feared by your subjects, to be respected
and obeyed by your troops, to annihilate those who can or must attack you,
to reform and modernize old institutions, to be severe yet cordial,
magnanimous and liberal, to abolish a disloyal militia and create a new one,
to preserve the friendship of kings and princes in such a way that they will
either favor you graciously or oppose you cautiously—then for such
purposes you will not find fresher examples to follow than the actions of
this man.

Only the election of Julius II to the papacy, in which he made the wrong

choice, can be charged against him; for, as I have said, though he could not
have had his own choice ratified, he still could have prevented the election
of anyone he did not favor. Therefore, he should never have permitted any
cardinal he had injured or any who would afterward have cause to fear him
to be elected pope, for men do harm either because of fear or because of
hatred. Among the cardinals he had injured were Giuliano della Rovere,

Giovanni Colonna, Raffaello Riario of Savona, and Ascanio Sforza;19 and
all the others would have had reason to fear him except the Spanish
cardinals and the Cardinal of Rouen—the former because of family ties and
other obligations, the latter because of his connections with the French
kingdom. The Duke, therefore, should have favored the election of a
Spaniard above all else and, failing that, he should have accepted the
Cardinal of Rouen, not Giuliano della Rovere. Those who believe that
where great personages are concerned new favors cause old injuries to be
forgotten deceive themselves. Thus the Duke erred in the election, and it
was the cause of his downfall.

Concerning Those Who Become Princes by Evil

Means

BUT SINCE a private citizen may also become a prince in two ways which
cannot be entirely attributed to fortune or to ability, I do not think these
should be overlooked, even though one of them could be treated more

extensively in a discussion concerning republics.1 These two ways relate to
occasions when a person ascends to power by wicked and nefarious means,
and to occasions when a private citizen becomes the ruler of his country
through the wishes of his fellow citizens. The first I will illustrate with two
examples (one ancient, the other modern) without otherwise entering into a
discussion of its merits, for I think that it would be enough to imitate these
examples if one were constrained by necessity to do so.

Not merely from a private calling, but from an abject and lowly one as

well, Agathocles of Sicily became King of Syracuse.2 Born the son of a
potter, this man lived wickedly at every stage of his life. Yet his wickedness
was accompanied by so much vigor of mind and body that, having taken up
a military career, he was able to rise through the ranks and become the
commanding officer. Once established in this position, he decided to
become Lord of Syracuse and to retain by violence, without obligation to
anyone, the power that others had conferred upon him. Having come to an
accord on the matter with Hamilcar of Carthage, who was then
commanding an army in Sicily, he ordered the Senate and the people of

Syracuse to assemble one morning as if affairs of concern to the republic
had to be considered. Then, at a given signal, he had his soldiers fall upon
all the senators and all the richest citizens. These having been slain, he
seized the lordship of the city and held it without any civil opposition. And
though he was twice routed by the Carthaginians and even besieged by
them, he not only defended his city but, leaving part of his forces behind for
its protection, with the others he even invaded Africa and thus freed
Syracuse from the siege, reducing the Carthaginians to such extremities that
they were compelled to settle for possession of Africa and leave Sicily to
him.

Anyone who examines the life and actions of this man, therefore, will

find little or nothing to attribute to fortune; for as was said before, it was not
through anyone's favor, but rather through his own advancement in the
ranks of the army, won at the cost of a thousand hardships and risks, that he
gained the power which he then maintained by many bold and hazardous
undertakings. Still it cannot be called virtue to slay one's fellow citizens, to
betray one's friends, to act without faith, without pity, without religion. By
such methods one may win dominion but not glory. But if we consider
Agathocles' boldness in confronting and surmounting dangers and his
greatness of spirit in enduring and overcoming adversities, we cannot see
why he should be judged inferior to any truly outstanding captain. Yet his
savage and inhuman cruelty and his many acts of wickedness do not permit
him to be celebrated among men of unusual excellence. And that which he
accomplished without fortune and without virtue cannot be attributed to
either of these qualities.

In our own time, when Pope Alexander VI was still reigning, there was

the example of Oliverotto da Fermo.3 An orphan from childhood, he was
raised by Giovanni Fogliani, his maternal uncle, and then in early youth
was sent to serve as a soldier under Paolo Vitelli so that by becoming expert
in that profession he might attain a worthy rank. After Paolo's death, he
served under Paolo's brother Vitellozzo and, being clever, vigorous, and
bold, he soon became his chief officer. Deeming it servile, however, to take
orders from others, he plotted with certain citizens of Fermo, to whom the
enslavement of their city was dearer than its freedom, and with the help of

Vitellozzo he resolved to seize the city for himself. He wrote to Giovanni
Fogliani, therefore, and said that as he had been away from home for some
years, he now desired to visit his uncle and his native city and to look over
his inheritance; and since he had toiled for no other purpose but to win
honor, he now wanted his fellow citizens to see that he had not wasted his
time. Therefore he asked that he be permitted to come honorably escorted
by a hundred horsemen, his friends and servants, and that his uncle be
pleased to arrange for the citizens of Fermo to give him a worthy reception.
Such a welcome, he said, would bring honor not only to himself but to
Giovanni as well, since he had been Giovanni's pupil.

Giovanni did not fail in any courteous obligation to his nephew. Having

seen to it that the citizens of Fermo received him honorably, he gave him
lodgings in his own residence, where a few days later, after having made all
necessary arrangements for the crime he contemplated, Oliverotto prepared
a sumptuous banquet to which Giovanni Fogliani and all the leading
citizens of Fermo had been invited. When the dinner and all the
entertainments that are a customary part of such gatherings had come to an
end, Oliverotto, as a ruse, launched upon a discussion of certain serious
matters and talked of the greatness of Alexander VI and of his son Cesare
and of their enterprises. When Giovanni and the others began to reply,
Oliverotto rose up suddenly and said that such matters should be discussed
in a more private place. He thereupon withdrew into another room with
Giovanni and his other guests, but they were scarcely seated when soldiers
rushed out from certain hiding places and slew Giovanni and all who were
with him.

After the slaughter, Oliverotto mounted his horse, rode through the city

and laid siege to the palace of the chief magistrates, who were constrained
by fear to obey him, and set up a government at the head of which he placed
himself. Having slain all those who could have turned resentment into
injury, he proceeded to fortify his position with new civic and military
ordinances, so that during the one year in which he ruled he succeeded not
only in making himself secure in Fermo but also in becoming a source of
anxiety to his neighbors. And, as in the case of Agathocles, his expulsion
would have been difficult if he had not allowed himself to be deceived by

Cesare Borgia at Senigallia, where, as before mentioned, one year after the
parricide he was seized with Vitelli and the Orsini, and there, together with
Vitellozzo, who had taught him both valor and perfidy, he was strangled.

Some may wonder how it happened that Agathocles and others like him

could so long remain secure in their dominions after their countless acts of
cruelty and treachery, and could defend themselves from foreign foes
without ever being conspired against by the citizenry, while other men who
also resorted to cruelty were unable to keep their states even in times of
peace, not to mention the more uncertain times of war. I believe this is
explained by proper and improper use of cruelty. It can be said to be
properly used (if one may speak favorably of what is bad) when one resorts
to it at one stroke out of a need for safety and does not thereafter insist upon
it, but seeks instead to replace it with measures that are of the greatest
possible use to his subjects. It is improperly used when, though rarely
applied at the start, it is resorted to with increasing rather than decreasing
frequency as time goes by. Those who follow the first course of action may
expect pardon from God and man and may hope to improve their
circumstances as Agathocles did. Those who follow the second course
cannot possibly remain in power.

Therefore, it is to be noted that in seizing a state one ought to consider all

the injuries he will be obliged to inflict and then proceed to inflict them all
at once so as to avoid a frequent repetition of such acts. Thus he will be able
to create a feeling of security among his subjects and, by benefiting them,
win their approval. Anyone who acts otherwise, either through timidity or
bad judgment, will always have to keep a dagger ready in his hand, nor will
he ever be able to trust his subjects since, because of continually renewed
injuries, they will never be able to feel safe with him. Injuries must be
committed all at once so that, being savored less, they will arouse less
resentment. Benefits, on the other hand, should be bestowed little by little
so as to be more fully savored. Above all, a prince should treat his subjects
in such a way that no event, whether good or bad, will cause him to alter his
conduct. For punishments inflicted in time of dire necessity come too late to
be useful; and the good that one does then will also be fruitless, for it will
seem forced by circumstances, and no one will feel in any way grateful.

Concerning the Civil Principality

TURNING NOW to the other case, when a private citizen becomes the
ruler of his country not through perfidy or intolerable violence but rather
through the aid of his fellow citizens, we may call what ensues a civil
principality (and neither exceptional ability nor unusual good fortune is
needed to attain it, but only a certain fortunate cunning). I say that one
becomes the ruler of such a principality through the support of either the
common people or the nobles, for these two opposing parties are to be
found in every city; and they originate from the fact that the common
people do not want to be commanded or oppressed by the nobles, whereas
the nobles do want to command and oppress them. From these conflicting
desires will come one of three consequences: principality, liberty, or

license.1

A principality, then, can come into being either by means of the common

people or by means of the nobles, depending upon which of the two has the
opportunity. When the nobles see that they can no longer withstand the
people, they bestow power upon one of their own party and make him
prince so that they can gratify their appetites under his protection. Likewise,
when the common people see that they can no longer withstand the nobles,
they bestow power upon someone of their own party and make him prince
in order to find protection under his authority. The man who becomes
prince through the help of the nobles will find it more difficult to remain in
power than the man who becomes prince through the help of the people, for

the former will be surrounded by men who will presume to be his equals.
As a consequence, he will not be able to command them or control them as
he would like.

But the prince who comes to power through the support of the people

will stand alone, and there will be few or none at all near him who will not
be disposed to obey him. Besides, it is impossible to satisfy the nobles fairly
without injuring others, whereas it is indeed possible to do so with respect
to the people, for their wishes have more right, since they seek to avoid
oppression while the nobles seek to oppress. It should also be noted that a
prince can never be secure against a hostile populace because it is
numerous, whereas he can be secure against the nobles because they are
few. The worst he can fear from a hostile people is to be abandoned by
them, but from a hostile nobility he must fear not only being abandoned but
also being attacked. Being possessed of more foresight and shrewdness, the
nobles will not let slip any chance to protect their interests, and they will
seek to gain favor with any potential winner. Moreover, a prince must of
necessity accept the common people as he finds them, but he can very well
do without any particular group of nobles, since he can make them and
unmake them at any time by withdrawing or bestowing authority as he
pleases.

Now to develop this point further, I say that nobles ought to be viewed in

two principal ways: their procedure will be either to join their fortune to
yours or to hold back from doing so. If they join theirs to yours and do not
act rapaciously, you should honor and cherish them. But if they hold back,
then again they must be viewed in two ways: they may do so through fear
and natural lack of spirit, in which case you may make use of them,
especially of those among them who are capable and judicious, for these
nobles will bring you honor in prosperity and need not be feared in
adversity. But when they avoid joining you, through cunning or ambition,
that is a sign that they have more concern for themselves than for you. As
regards these nobles, a prince must be on his guard, and he must fear them
as though they were professed enemies, for in time of adversity they will be
out to ruin him.

Thus one who becomes prince with the help of the people will have to

preserve their good will—an easy matter, since they only ask that he avoid
oppressing them. But one who becomes prince with the help of the nobles
against the will of the people must above all else seek to win the good will
of the people—again an easy matter so long as he will undertake to protect
them. And since men become more obliged to their benefactor when they
receive good where they had expected harm, the people will become more
favorably disposed to the prince than they would have been if he had
acquired power with their support. He can win their favor in many different
ways; but since these vary according to circumstances, they cannot be
reduced to rule. Therefore they will not be taken up.

I will conclude by saying only that the good will of the people is vital to

a prince; otherwise he will be helpless in times of adversity. Nabis, prince
of the Spartans, sustained attack from the whole of Greece and from a

triumphant Roman army as well;2 yet he was able to defend both his
position and his country against them. To assure his safety when the danger
arose, it was enough to take measures against only a few subjects; but if the
populace had been hostile to him, such action would have proved
inadequate. Now, let no one refute me with that trite proverb: “He who
builds on the people builds on mud,” for this is true only when a private
citizen trusts in them and then deludes himself into thinking that they will
rescue him if he is set upon by enemies or by the magistrates. In such a case
he could often be mistaken, as was true for the Gracchi in Rome and for

Messer Giorgio Scali in Florence.3 But when the prince who trusts in them
is a man of courage who is able to command, who is undismayed by
adversity, who has not neglected his other defenses and can keep up the
morale of his subjects by his orders and by his example, then such a man
will never be deceived by them, and he will conclude that he has built his
foundations well.

Usually a principality of this kind runs into difficulty when its civil

structure is replaced by absolutism, for the prince of such a state rules either
directly or through the magistrates. If the latter is the case, his position is all
the weaker and the more dangerous, for then he is dependent upon those

citizens who have been elevated to positions of authority and who can very
easily deprive him of power, especially in time of trouble, either by
opposing him or by not obeying him. Moreover, the prince will not have
time to take power fully into his own hands when an emergency arises,
because the citizens and subjects who have been used to taking orders from
the magistrates in normal times will not be inclined to take orders from him
in time of danger. Then, too, in moments of uncertainty there will always be
a scarcity of men in whom to trust. The ruler of this form of state must not
put faith in what applies in times of peace when the citizens need the
government, for then everyone runs to him, everyone promises; all are
ready to die for him when the risk of death is far off. But when trouble
arises, when the government is in need of its citizens, few are found willing.
This sort of experience is all the more dangerous because a ruler can have it
only once. Therefore a wise prince must provide in such a way that, in
whatever circumstances, the citizens will always be in need of him and of
his government. Then they will always be loyal to him.

How the Strength of All Principalities Should Be

Measured

IN EXAMINING the character of these principalities, it is useful to take
another matter into consideration, and that is whether the prince will have
sufficient power and resources to stand on his own when the need arises, or
whether he will always require the protection of others. By way of
clarifying, I say that in my judgment the prince will be able to take care of
himself if he has a sufficient supply of men or of money to put an adequate
army in the field, capable of engaging anyone likely to attack him. It is also
my judgment that he will always be dependent upon others for help if he is
unable to meet his enemy in open battle and must take refuge behind his
fortifications. As regards the first of these two possibilities, I have already

spoken and will speak later on,1 of what further is needed. As regards the
second, there is nothing further to say, except to advise the prince who finds
himself in this situation to provision and fortify his city and to have no
concern for the surrounding countryside. Anyone who has provided
carefully for the fortification of his city and has conducted himself toward
his subjects as I have already indicated (and will further indicate later on)
will never be attacked except with great reluctance. Men are always
opposed to ventures in which they foresee difficulties, and it will not seem
easy to attack a prince who has kept his city vigorously strong and is not
hated by his people.

The cities of Germany enjoy great liberty. They possess but little territory

beyond their walls; yet they obey the emperor only when they wish to,2

fearing neither him nor any other of their powerful neighbors; for they are
so well fortified that everyone is convinced it would be a wearying and
difficult task to take them. They are all protected with suitable moats and
walls and have adequate artillery. They always keep enough food, drink,
and fuel in their public depots to last a year. Moreover, so that the common
people may be fed without public expense, they have enough work of the
sort that is the mainstay of the city to keep the populace engaged at their
usual crafts for the space of a year. They also have a high regard for
military exercises and have many regulations governing them.

Therefore, a prince in possession of a strong city who avoids arousing

hatred is beyond danger of attack; and even if he should be attacked, his
assailant would be forced to leave off in disgrace. For the affairs of the
world are so changeable that it is impossible for an opponent to keep an
army idle in the field for a year. Now, if someone were to interject that the
people owning property outside the walls would lose patience when they
saw it being set afire and that a long siege coupled with their own self-
interest would cause them to forget their concern for the prince, I would
reply that a bold and powerful prince could always overcome all such
difficulties. He could at one time awaken his subjects' hopes that the trouble
would soon be over, at another arouse their fear of the enemy's cruelty, at
still another take skillful measures against the most outspoken of them.
Besides, it is reasonable to assume that the enemy would pillage and burn
the countryside immediately upon his arrival, at a time when the spirits of
the defenders would still be hot and eager for their task. Thus the prince
should have less to fear, for after a few days, when the spirits of his men
will have cooled, the damage will already have been done, the injuries will
have been received, and there will be no remedy. Then more than ever they
will feel bound to their prince and will consider him under obligation to
them, since their property will have been pillaged and burned in his
defense. It is the nature of men to feel as much bound by the favors they do
as by those they receive. Thus, if everything is properly considered, it will
not appear difficult for a wise prince to keep up the determination of his

citizens, both before and during a siege, so long as he does not lack food
and the means of defense.

Concerning Ecclesiastical Principalities

ONLY ECCLESIASTICAL principalities now remain for us to discuss, and
all problems concerning these are limited to the time preceding their
acquisition. For though they are gained through ability or through fortune,
they may be kept without one or the other because they are sustained by
ancient laws rooted in religion that have proved capable of keeping princes
in power no matter how they live or rule. Ecclesiastical princes alone can
hold states without defending them, and subjects without governing them.
Their states, though left undefended, are not taken from them, and their
subjects, though left ungoverned, remain indifferent, lacking both will and
strength to remove them. These states alone, therefore, are secure and
happy.

And since they are sustained by superior causes which transcend human

understanding, I will not discuss them. Because they are supported and
exalted by God, it would be an act of presumption and rashness to speak of
them. Still, if someone should ask how the Church attained such temporal
greatness (despite the fact that up to the time of Alexander VI it was little
respected among Italian rulers—not merely among the truly powerful ones
but among all the petty lords and barons as well—while now she can make
a French monarch tremble, drive him out of Italy, and ruin the Venetians), it
may be useful to recall the major causes, though they are already well

known.1

Before Charles VIII of France came into Italy,2 this land was ruled by the

Pope, the Venetians, the King of Naples, the Duke of Milan, and the
Florentines. These powers had two principal objectives: the first was to see
that no foreigner brought an army into Italy; the second was to see that none
of these powers themselves took over more territory. The two of them that
were held in deepest suspicion were the Pope and the Venetians. To keep
the latter in check it was found necessary to form an alliance of all the

others, as was done for the defense of Ferrara;3 to keep the Pope in check it
was found useful to rely on the barons of Rome. Since they were divided
into two factions, the Orsini and the Colonna, these two baronial houses

were forever finding cause for strife between them.4 Always in arms under
the pontiff's very nose, they had the effect of keeping him weak and
inactive. And even though bold popes like Sixtus IV occasionally appeared

on the scene,5 they were either not fortunate or clever enough to free
themselves of this obstacle. Moreover, the short span of a pope's reign—ten
years on the average—made it difficult to suppress either of these factions.
And if a pope did come near to crushing the Colonna faction, for example,
another pope would succeed him who would restore it but have insufficient
time to crush the Orsini. It is this situation that has caused the temporal
power of the popes to be little respected in Italy.

Then came Alexander VI, who, of all the pontiffs there have ever been,

was the first to show what a pope with money and troops could do. Using
Duke Valentino as his instrument and the French invasion as his
opportunity, he achieved all those things which I mentioned earlier in

speaking of the Duke's enterprise.6 Though his object had been to
aggrandize the Duke rather than the Church, his achievements nevertheless
did increase her power, since she fell heir to his labors following
Alexander's death and the Duke's removal. Then came Julius II, who found
the Church strong, in possession of all of Romagna, and free of those
factious barons of Rome whom the strokes of Alexander had reduced to
impotence. He also found the way still open to those methods of
accumulating money which had never been employed until the time of

Alexander.7

Julius not only pursued the same objectives as his predecessor but he

extended them further. He sought to conquer Bologna, defeat the Venetians,
and drive the French out of Italy; and he succeeded in all these enterprises,
which are the more to his praise because he accomplished them all for the

Church and not for private advantage.8 He kept the Orsini and Colonna
parties confined to the weak circumstances in which he found them; and
though there might have been leaders among them quite capable of
attempting a change, two things kept them in check: one was the power of
the Church, which awed them; the other was that they had no cardinals
among them to give rise to factional strife. These two parties will never be
at peace when there are cardinals numbered among them, for it is they who
nourish party conflicts both in Rome and elsewhere; and then the barons are
compelled to engage in their defense. Thus it is that from the ambition of
prelates, discords and broils are engendered among the barons. His Holiness
Pope Leo has found the papacy very strong, and therefore it may be hoped
that, as his predecessors made it great through the use of arms, he will make
it revered and still greater through his goodness and his other countless

virtues.9

Concerning Various Kinds of Troops, and

Especially Mercenaries

HAVING DISCUSSED in detail the various kinds of principalities which I
mentioned in the beginning, and having to some degree considered the
causes of their respective strengths and weaknesses and demonstrated the
means by which many have sought to win and hold them, there now
remains for me to discuss the means of offense and defense which these
principalities can generally employ. I said earlier that a prince must build on
sound foundations, otherwise his downfall is assured. The two most
essential foundations for any state, whether it be old or new, or both old and
new, are sound laws and sound military forces. Now, since the absence of
sound laws assures the absence of sound military forces, while the presence

of sound military forces indicates the presence of sound laws as well,1 I
shall forgo a consideration of laws and discuss military forces instead.

I say, therefore, that the troops with which a prince defends his state may

be his own or they may be mercenaries or auxiliaries,2 or a combination of
these. Now, mercenary and auxiliary forces are useless and dangerous; and
any ruler who keeps his state dependent upon mercenaries will never have
real peace or security, for they are disorganized, undisciplined, ambitious,
and faithless. Brave before their allies, they are cowards before the enemy.
They show no fear of God, no faith toward men. A prince who employs
them will stave off ruin only so long as he can stave off action. In peace he

will be despoiled by them; in war he will be despoiled by his enemies. The
reason for all this is that they have no tie of devotion, no motive for taking
the field except their meager pay, and this is not enough to make them
willing to die for him. They are quite anxious to be his soldiers so long as
he avoids war, but let war come and they will either desert or flee.

I need hardly spend much effort to convince anyone of the truth of these

observations, for Italy's ruin has had no other cause but the fact that for
many years she relied upon mercenary forces. Some of these did indeed
achieve a measure of success in a few instances and seemed very bold in
fighting against each other. But as soon as foreigners invaded Italy, they
showed what they really were. Thus King Charles of France was able to

conquer Italy with a piece of chalk.3 Whoever said that our sins were to

blame for this spoke the truth.4 It was not the sins he had in mind, however,
but rather these I have mentioned; and since they were the sins of princes,
princes have paid for them too.

I want to demonstrate the shortcomings of these troops more fully.

Mercenary captains either are or are not skillful soldiers. If they are, you
cannot trust them, for they will always seek to gain power for themselves
either by oppressing you, their master, or by oppressing others against your
wishes. If, on the other hand, they are not skillful soldiers, they will still be
your ruin in most cases. Now, if someone should argue that any man in
command of troops, whether mercenary or not, would do the same, I would
answer that the control of troops should be in the hands of princes or
republics. A prince ought to take personal charge and serve as commander;
a republic ought to appoint one of its citizens. If the person appointed
should prove incompetent, he ought to be replaced; if he should prove
successful, there ought to be laws to keep him in bounds. Experience shows
that only princes and republics with troops of their own have accomplished
great things, while mercenary forces have brought nothing but harm.
Moreover, a republic with troops of its own is less likely to be subjugated
by one of its citizens than a republic using foreign troops.

Rome and Sparta remained armed and free for many centuries. Currently

the Swiss are excellently armed and enjoy great freedom. Among the
ancients the Carthaginians, for example, employed mercenaries and were
nearly conquered by them after their first war with the Romans, even

though these troops were commanded by citizens.5 After the death of
Epaminondas, the Thebans made Philip of Macedon their captain and, once

victorious, he deprived them of their liberty.6 After the death of Duke
Filippo, the Milanese hired Francesco Sforza to fight the Venetians; yet
once he had defeated them at Caravaggio he joined sides with them to

subdue his own employers, the Milanese themselves.7 After Francesco's
own father had been hired by Queen Giovanna of Naples, he suddenly
deserted her, leaving her without troops; whereupon she was compelled to
fall into the clutches of the King of Aragon in order not to lose her

kingdom.8

If the Venetians and Florentines did extend their territories in the past

through the use of mercenaries whose commanders did not become their
masters but defended them instead, then as far as the Florentines are
concerned the reason is that they were lucky: for among the skilled captains
whom they had cause to fear some proved unable to conquer, some had
opposition, and some turned their ambitions elsewhere. One who could not

conquer was Giovanni Aucut;9 his loyalty, therefore, was never really
ascertained, though everyone will admit that if he had been victorious the
Florentines would have been in his power. The Sforzas were always

opposed by the Bracceschi,10 each eying the other suspiciously. Francesco
Sforza finally directed his ambitions toward Lombardy, while Braccio
directed his against the Church and the Kingdom of Naples. But let us turn
to more recent events. The Florentines hired Paolo Vitelli—a very clever
captain who had risen to a position of great importance from modest

beginnings.11 No one will deny that if this man had been able to defeat Pisa
he would have had the Florentines at his mercy, for by defecting to their
enemy he would have left them powerless, and so to keep him loyal they
would have had to submit to him.

As for the Venetians, if we examine their operations we will note that

they went forward securely and gloriously so long as they themselves
fought their wars (and this was their policy until they turned their attentions
to the mainland). With their own patricians and common people under arms
they achieved great things. But as soon as they began to fight on land they

gave up this advantage and adopted the methods of Italian warfare.12

Owing to their great reputation and the modest size of their gains, they had
little to fear from their captains during the first period of land conquests.
But as soon as their territories increased, as they did under Carmagnuola,
they got an early hint of their error. Having had proof of Carmagnuola's
remarkable ability, by which they were victorious over the Duke of Milan,
and having then noted his reluctance to go on with the war, they concluded
that since he was no longer willing they could win no more under his
command; still they could not dismiss him, lest they lose their gains

thereby. And so for safety's sake they were compelled to execute him.13

The Venetians then hired Bartolomeo da Bergamo, Ruberto da San
Severino, the Count of Pitigliano, and the like to serve as captains. With
these men they had to fear not gains but losses, as they later discovered at
Vailà, where in one day Venice lost what it had taken her eight hundred

years of painful effort to gain.14 With mercenary troops gains are slow,
belated, and weak, while losses are swift and crushing. Now, since my
examples have brought me around to Italy, which has been controlled by
mercenary troops for many years, I want to go more deeply into the subject
so that once the origin and development of these forces have been
understood, it will be easier to provide correction.

You must understand, then, that in recent years, while the imperial power

began to suffer defeats in Italy and papal authority began to increase in the
temporal sphere, Italy became divided into many states. In many of the
larger cities the people rose up against the nobles who, formerly supported

by the emperor, had kept them in subjection.15 The Church favored these
revolts in order to gain temporal power. In many other cities one of the
citizens became prince. Thus it came about that Italy was almost entirely in
the hands of the Church and of some few republics. Since neither the clergy
nor the citizens were acquainted with arms, they began to hire foreign

troops. The first to make a reputation for these forces was Alberigo da

Conio, of Romagna.16 Braccio and Sforza, in their day arbiters of Italy,
were, along with others, products of his training. After these came all the
rest who have commanded troops of this kind in Italy down to our time.
And the result of their prowess has been that Italy was overrun by Charles,

plundered by Louis, ravished by Ferdinand, and dishonored by the Swiss.17

The aim of these captains was, first of all, to deprive the infantry of

standing in order to enhance that of their own troops. This they did because,
being entirely dependent upon their professional earnings for a livelihood
(since they possessed no territories of their own), they found a large body of
infantry impossible to feed and a small one insufficient to make a mark.
Consequently they resorted to the use of cavalry, by which they could gain
both a reputation and a livelihood. Things came to such a pass that in an
army of twenty thousand troops there were not even two thousand foot
soldiers. Moreover, these captains made every effort to eliminate hardship
and danger for themselves and their soldiers. They did not kill each other in
their assaults, but only took prisoners, even without expecting ransom. They
did not attack towns by night, nor did those in the towns attack the enemy
in their tents. They did not throw up stockades or dig ditches around their
encampments, nor did they take to the field in winter. And all these things
were permitted by their military code and, as before mentioned, had been
invented by them in order to avoid hardship and danger, with the result that
they have reduced Italy to slavery and shame.

Concerning Auxiliary, Mixed, and Native Forces

AUXILIARY FORCES—the other kind of useless troops—are those
supplied by a foreign power which has been called upon for assistance.
Pope Julius II did this recently in his campaign against Ferrara when, noting
the ineffectiveness of his mercenaries, he resorted to auxiliaries and

arranged that Ferdinand of Spain should send his armies to help him.1 Such
forces may be useful and trustworthy in pursuit of their own interests, but
they are almost always disastrous to the one who borrows them; for if they
are defeated, he is ruined; and if they are victorious, he becomes their
prisoner.

Even though ancient history is full of examples to prove this, I shall

nevertheless stick to the fresh one provided by Pope Julius, whose action
could hardly have been more ill-considered. In order to gain Ferrara, he put
himself entirely at the mercy of foreigners. But his good fortune brought
about a third complication which spared him the consequences of his
unwise decision, for when his auxiliaries were routed at Ravenna, the Swiss
arrived and, contrary to all expectations, including his own, they drove off

the victors.2 Thus he avoided becoming the prisoner of his enemies, who
had fled, and likewise of his auxiliaries, since he had won with other arms
than theirs. Being entirely unarmed themselves, the Florentines sent ten
thousand French troops to subdue Pisa. As a result they experienced greater

danger than ever they had in any other time of trouble.3 To attack his

neighbors, the Emperor of Constantinople sent ten thousand Turks into
Greece. When the war ended, they refused to leave. This was the beginning

of the enslavement of Greece by the infidels.4

Anyone wishing to be incapable of victory, therefore, may use troops of

this kind, for they are more dangerous than mercenaries. With them ruin is
assured. They are entirely united, entirely subject to another's orders.
Mercenaries, on the other hand, need more time and better opportunity if
they are to hurt you after they have gained a victory, since, having been
assembled and hired by you, they are not united in one body. If you appoint
a third party to be their leader, he cannot so quickly gain influence over
them as to do you harm. In short, with mercenaries the danger lies in their
cowardice; with auxiliaries, it lies in their capability.

Hence wise princes have always shunned such troops and have relied on

their own; and they have thought it better to lose with their own troops than
to win with those of others, judging it no true victory to win with another's
arms, and I do not hesitate to cite Cesare Borgia and his actions for

illustration.5 This Duke entered Romagna with auxiliaries—all French
troops—and with these he took Imola and Forlí. But then, judging them no
longer reliable, he changed over to mercenaries, believing these to be less
risky, and he hired Orsini and Vitelli. Finding these by turn hesitant,
disloyal, and dangerous to manage, he did away with them and resorted to
his own troops. One can easily see how much difference there is among the
various kinds of troops by noting the difference in the Duke's reputation
when he had French troops alone, when he had the Orsini and Vitelli, and
when he was left with his own troops under his command. In each
succeeding case it increased; nor was he ever highly esteemed until
everyone saw that he was in complete possession of his own forces.

I had intended not to depart from recent Italian examples; still I do not

want to overlook the case of Hiero of Syracuse, since I mentioned him

earlier.6 As I said, when the Syracusans made this man commander of the
armies, he quickly perceived that their mercenary forces, being like our own
hired Italian forces, were worthless. Judging that he could not safely keep

them nor safely discharge them, he had them cut to pieces. Thereafter he
made war with his own troops rather than with those of others. I should also
like to call to mind a symbolic incident from the Old Testament which is
relevant here. When David went before Saul and volunteered to go and
fight Goliath, the Philistine champion, the King gave him his own sword
and armor to encourage him. Having tried these on, however, David
declined them, saying that he could not do well with them. Instead, he

chose to face the enemy with his own sling and his own knife7 In the end,
the arms of another will fall from your hand, will weigh you down, or
restrain you.

Charles VII, the father of Louis XI, having employed his fortune and his

abilities to clear the English out of France, recognized the necessity of
having his own arms and gave orders for the establishment of native cavalry

and infantry units.8 Later his son Louis abolished the infantry and began to

hire Swiss mercenaries.9 As we now can see, this mistake, repeated by
others, is the cause of that kingdom's present peril. By enhancing the
reputation of the Swiss, the King has demoralized his own forces; and by
abolishing his infantry, he has made his cavalry dependent upon foreign
arms. Having grown accustomed to fight with Swiss troops, the French now
believe that they cannot win without them. Thus it happens that they are not
up to opposing the Swiss and will not oppose others without them. French
armies, therefore, are of mixed composition—part mercenary and part
native. In combination, these are far superior to purely auxiliary or purely
mercenary troops, but they are inferior to native ones. Let this example
suffice, for the Kingdom of France would be invincible if Charles VII's
orders had been maintained and extended. But men of little prudence will
do a thing for immediate gain without recognizing the poison it bears for

the future, as I indicated in my earlier reference to hectic fever.10

The man who does not recognize ills at their inception does not have true

wisdom, and this is given to few. Anyone searching for the first cause of the
ruin of the Roman Empire will find that it began with the hiring of

mercenaries.11 From that point the strength of the Roman Empire started to
decline, and all the valor it lost was transferred to the Goths.

I conclude, therefore, that no state, unless it have its own arms, is secure.

Indeed, it is a hostage to fortune, having no trustworthy power to defend it
in adversity. It has always been the expressed opinion of wise men “quod
nihil sit tam infirmum aut instabile quam fama potentiae non sua vi

nixae.”12 By one's own forces I mean those composed of subjects, citizens,
or dependents. All others are either mercenary or auxiliary. The way to
organize one's own forces is easy to find if one examines the methods of the

four individuals I have mentioned13 and notes how Philip, the father of
Alexander the Great, and many other rulers and republics raised and
organized their troops. With their methods I am in full accord.

A Prince's Concern in Military Matters

A PRINCE must have no other objective, no other thought, nor take up any
profession but that of war, its methods and its discipline, for that is the only
art expected of a ruler. And it is of such great value that it not only keeps
hereditary princes in power, but often raises men of lowly condition to that
rank. It may be noted, on the other hand, that when princes have given more
thought to fine living than to arms, they have lost their states. The first
cause of losing them is the neglect of this art, just as the first means of
gaining them is proficiency in it.

Through the pursuit of arms, Francesco Sforza rose from private citizen

to become Duke of Milan; his sons, by shunning military hardships,1 from
dukes became private citizens, for among other ills which ensue from being
disarmed is contempt, a disgrace which a prince must guard against, as I
shall later explain. There can be no proper relation between one who is
armed and one who is not; nor is it reasonable to expect that one who is
armed will voluntarily obey one who is not, or that the latter will feel secure
among servants who are armed. Since these will be inclined to show disdain
and the prince to show suspicion, it is impossible that they should function
well together. Consequently, a prince who is ignorant of military matters
will find, along with the other ills mentioned, that he cannot have the
esteem of his soldiers and cannot trust them.

Hence he must never turn his attention away from military exercises.

Indeed, he should devote himself to them in time of peace even more than
in time of war; and he may do this in two ways: through action and through
study. As regards action, besides keeping his troops well disciplined and fit,
he should devote himself to hunting, by means of which he may accustom
his body to hardships and at the same time learn the topography of places—
the slope of mountains, the opening out of valleys, the disposition of plains,
the character of rivers and marshes—devoting much attention to these
matters. Knowledge of this kind is useful to him in two ways. First of all, he
becomes acquainted with the nature of his country and learns how it can be
defended; secondly, by means of this acquaintance, he can the more readily
understand the nature of any other place which he may subsequently have
to reconnoiter. For the hills, valleys, plains, rivers, and marshes of Tuscany,
for example, are in some respects like those in other provinces. Thus, from
an understanding of the topography of one province he can easily acquire
an understanding of others. The prince who lacks this ability lacks the first
requirement of a commander, for by this he learns how to locate the enemy,
how to choose quarters, how to advance upon the enemy, how to deploy his
soldiers, and how to lay siege to cities with advantage.

Among other reasons why writers have praised Philopoemen, the leader

of the Achaeans, is that in time of peace he thought of nothing but the

manner of conducting war;2 and when he was out in the country with
friends he would stop and ask them: “If the enemy were on that hill and we
had our army here, which would have the advantage? How could we
advance on them in good order? If we wished to retreat, how would we go
about it? If they were to retreat, how would we pursue them?” And as he
went along he would set all the situations before them with which an army
might be confronted. He would hear his friends' opinions, and he would
give his own, supporting it with reasons. Thus, thanks to these continual
deliberations, when he was at the head of his army no problem could ever
arise for which he did not have the solution.

Now, as regards study, the prince ought to read history and reflect upon

the deeds of outstanding men, note how they conducted themselves in war,
examine the causes of their victories and defeats, and thereby learn to

emulate the former and avoid the latter. Above all, he ought to do as some
wise men have done and take to imitating some celebrated predecessor
whose deeds and actions he may keep ever before him—just as Alexander,
it is said, imitated Achilles; Caesar imitated Alexander; and Scipio, Cyrus.
Anyone who reads Xenophon's life of Cyrus will recognize how much of
Scipio's glory derives from his imitating it and how closely he conformed to
what Xenophon had written about Cyrus as regards continence, affability,
humanity, and liberality. Every wise prince should pursue habits similar to
these and never submit to idleness in time of peace, but rather endeavor to
turn such time to advantage so as to profit from it in adversity. Thus, when
fortune turns against him, he will be prepared to resist it.

Concerning Things for Which Men, and Princes

Especially, Are Praised or Censured

IT NOW remains to consider what the attitude and conduct of a prince
toward his subjects and friends should be. And since I know that many
people have already written about these matters, I fear that I shall be
considered presumptuous in writing about them, too, the more so because in
treating this subject I depart from the rules set down by others. But since it
is my intention to write something of use to those who will understand, I
deem it best to stick to the practical truth of things rather than to fancies.
Many men have imagined republics and principalities that never really
existed at all. Yet the way men live is so far removed from the way they
ought to live that anyone who abandons what is for what should be pursues
his downfall rather than his preservation; for a man who strives after
goodness in all his acts is sure to come to ruin, since there are so many men
who are not good. Hence it is necessary that a prince who is interested in
his survival learn to be other than good, making use of this capacity or
refraining from it according to need.

Leaving fancies about princes aside, therefore, and considering only what

is true, I say that when men (especially princes, who are most exposed to
our view) are spoken of, they are marked for qualities which bring them
either praise or censure. Thus some are called generous and others miserly
(which is a Tuscan term, for in our language an avaricious person [avaro] is
one who is avid for gain, while a miser [misero] is one who spares

expense). Some are called openhanded, others rapacious; some cruel, others
merciful; some untrustworthy, others faithful; some effeminate and weak,
others fierce and bold; some courteous, others haughty; some lascivious,
others chaste; some frank, others wily; some stubborn, others pliant; some
grave, others merry; some religious, others unbelieving; and so forth.
Everyone will admit that it would be very praiseworthy if a prince had all
those above-named qualities that are deemed good; but since he cannot
have them, nor devotedly adhere to them, because human conditions will
not permit, he must be sufficiently prudent to avoid a reputation for those
vices which would deprive him of his state and, if possible, also avoid those
that would not deprive him of it. In case he is unable to avoid these last,
however, he need not be overly concerned. Moreover, he need not be
concerned if he acquires a reputation for those vices without which he
would be unlikely to save his state. For, everything considered, he will find
things which, though seeming good, will lead to his ruin if pursued, and

others which, though seeming evil, will result in his safety and well-being.1

Concerning Liberality and Parsimony

BEGINNING WITH the first of the above-named qualities then, I say that it
would be well to be reputed generous. Yet to be so generous as to gain a
reputation for this quality is harmful. If one is prudently generous, as he
ought to be, the fact will not be noticed in him, nor will he escape censure
for being miserly. To be reputed generous among men, one must indulge in
every form of ostentation, with the result that any prince who does so will
have to spend all of his resources and, to keep up his reputation, will have
to burden his people unduly by resorting to extortionate taxation and every
other means of raising funds. This will begin to make him odious to his
subjects and, as he declines into poverty, will lose him the respect of
everyone. The outcome will be that, having burdened the many and
rewarded the few, he will feel the disadvantage of his position at the
slightest sign of trouble and will be exposed to danger. Once he recognizes
his error, however, and seeks to amend it, he will quickly be labeled a miser.

Therefore, being unable to assume the virtue of liberality so that it will be

recognized and yet create no danger, a wise prince will not object to being
reputed a miser. With the passage of time he will come to seem more
generous when it is seen that, thanks to his parsimony, his income is
sufficient to his needs, that he can provide for his own defense against
attack, and that he can undertake campaigns without burdening his people.
Thus he will demonstrate liberality toward all those whom he does not tax

—the many—and he will demonstrate miserliness toward all those from
whom he withholds largesse—the few.

In our day we have seen great things accomplished by none except men

who have been reputed parsimonious, the others having been driven from
power. After Pope Julius II had profited from a reputation for liberality to

win the papacy, he made no effort to keep it, so as to make war instead.1

The present King of France has engaged in so many wars without levying
special taxes on his subjects because he has counterbalanced the extra
expenses by his parsimony. The present King of Spain would never have
undertaken and won so many campaigns if he had been reputed a generous

man.2

Hence, if in his desire to avoid preying upon his subjects and provide for

his defense, if to escape the contempt of poverty and shun rapacity, a prince
should acquire a name for miserliness, he need not be concerned, for this is
one of the vices which permit him to reign. Now, if someone were to say,
“Caesar gained supreme power by being openhanded, and many others have
attained high station by being so,” I would answer: “Either a man is already
a ruler or he is on the way to becoming one; if he is already a ruler,
liberality will do him harm; if he is on the way, a reputation for liberality
will indeed be necessary.” Caesar was in process of attaining the Roman
dictatorship; but if he had survived after attaining it and had not moderated
his expenditures, he would have destroyed his authority. If someone were to
reply, “There have been many princes who accomplished great things with
their armies and yet were regarded lavishly generous,” I would say: “

A prince spends either his own and his subjects' funds, or he spends those

of others. If the first is the case, he must be frugal; if the latter, he must
neglect no part of liberality.” A prince at the head of an army who sustains
himself by looting, pillaging, and extorting, handles property belonging to
others and therefore must needs be generous; otherwise his troops would
not follow him. What does not belong to him or to his subjects he may give
away freely, as Cyrus, Caesar, and Alexander did, for by bestowing the
goods of others he does not diminish, but rather increases, his standing.

Only the expenditure of one's own resources is harmful; and, indeed,
nothing feeds upon itself as liberality does. The more it is indulged, the
fewer are the means to indulge it further. As a consequence, a prince
becomes poor and contemptible or, to escape poverty, becomes rapacious
and hateful. Of all the things he must guard against, hatred and contempt
come first, and liberality leads to both. Therefore it is better to have a name
for miserliness, which breeds disgrace without hatred, than, in pursuing a
name for liberality, to resort to rapacity, which breeds both disgrace and
hatred.

Concerning Cruelty: Whether It Is Better to Be

Loved Than to Be Feared, or the Reverse

TURNING TO some other of the aforementioned qualities, I say that every
prince ought to wish to be considered kind rather than cruel. Nevertheless,
he must take care to avoid misusing his kindness. Cesare Borgia was
considered cruel; yet his cruelty restored Romagna, uniting it in peace and
loyalty. If this result is considered good, then he must be judged much
kinder than the Florentines who, to avoid being called cruel, allowed Pistoia

to be destroyed.1 A prince, therefore, must be indifferent to the charge of
cruelty if he is to keep his subjects loyal and united. Having set an example
once or twice, he may thereafter act far more mercifully than the princes
who, through excessive kindness, allow disorders to arise from which
murder and rapine ensue. Disorders harm the entire citizenry, while the
executions ordered by a prince harm only a few individuals. Indeed, of all
princes, the newly established one can least of all escape the charge of
cruelty, for new states are encumbered with dangers. As Virgil has Dido say,

Res dura, et regni novitas me talia cogunt Moliri, et late fines
custode tueri.

Nevertheless, he ought to be slow to believe what he hears and slow to

act. Nor should he fear imaginary dangers, but proceed with moderation,
prudence, and humanity, avoiding carelessness born of overconfidence and
unbearable harshness born of excessive distrust.

Here a question arises: whether it is better to be loved than feared, or the

reverse. The answer is, of course, that it would be best to be both loved and
feared. But since the two rarely come together, anyone compelled to choose
will find greater security in being feared than in being loved. For this can be
said about the generality of men: that they are ungrateful, fickle,
dissembling, anxious to flee danger, and covetous of gain. So long as you
promote their advantage, they are all yours, as I said before, and will offer
you their blood, their goods, their lives, and their children when the need
for these is remote. When the need arises, however, they will turn against
you. The prince who bases his security upon their word, lacking other
provision, is doomed; for friendships that are gained by money, not by
greatness and nobility of spirit, may well be earned, but cannot be kept; and
in time of need, they will have fled your purse. Men are less concerned
about offending someone they have cause to love than someone they have
cause to fear. Love endures by a bond which men, being scoundrels, may
break whenever it serves their advantage to do so; but fear is supported by
the dread of pain, which is ever present.

Still a prince should make himself feared in such a way that, though he

does not gain love, he escapes hatred; for being feared but not hated go
readily together. Such a condition he may always attain if he will not touch
the property of his citizens and subjects, nor their women. And if he finds it
necessary to take someone's life, he should do so when there is suitable
justification and manifest cause; but above all, he should refrain from the
property of others, for men are quicker to forget the death of a father than
the loss of a patrimony. Furthermore, excuses for seizing property are never
lacking and, indeed, anyone who begins to live by plunder will always find
pretexts for taking over what belongs to someone else. On the other hand,
pretexts for taking someone's life arise more rarely and last a shorter time.

But when a prince is at the head of his armies and must command

multitudes of soldiers, then more than ever must he be indifferent to a
reputation for cruelty, for without such a reputation no army was ever held
together, nor was it ever fit for combat. Among the marvelous deeds of
Hannibal is numbered this one: that though he had an enormous army
composed of a great variety of races fighting in a foreign land, no
dissension ever arose among the troops or between the troops and their
leader, either in good times or in bad. This could have had no other source
but his inhuman cruelty which, together with his extraordinary qualities of
leadership, made him an object of constant reverence and terror to his
soldiers. To produce such an effect without this cruelty, his other qualities
would have been insufficient. Writers of scant judgment in this matter have,
on the one hand, admired his accomplishments and, on the other,
condemned their chief source.

The proof that his other qualities would have been insufficient may be

seen in the case of Scipio—a most exceptional man not only in his own
times but in all remembered history—whose soldiers mutinied in Spain for
no reason other than his excessive leniency, which allowed them more

freedom than was consonant with military discipline.3 Fabius Maximus
reproved him for it in the Senate and called him the corrupter of Roman

arms.4 When one of his lieutenants ravaged the Locrians, Scipio neither
avenged them nor took action to correct his lieutenant's insolence. This too
grew out of his mild nature, so much so, in fact, that someone seeking to
excuse Scipio's conduct before the Senate observed that many men have
more skill in avoiding errors than in correcting them. This propensity would
in time have damaged Scipio's fame and glory if he had persevered in it, but
since he was ruled by the Senate, its potential harmfulness remained hidden,
and it redounded to his glory.

Returning to the question, then, of being loved or feared, I conclude that

since men love as they themselves determine but fear as their ruler
determines, a wise prince must rely upon what he and not others can
control. He need only strive to avoid being hated, as I said.

In What Way Princes Should Keep Their Word1

HOW PRAISEWORTHY it is that a prince keeps his word and governs by
candor instead of craft, everyone knows. Yet the experience of our own
time shows that those princes who had little regard for their word and had
the craftiness to turn men's minds have accomplished great things and, in
the end, have overcome those who governed their actions by their pledges.

You must recognize that there are two ways of fighting: by means of law,

and by means of force. The first belongs properly to man, the second to
animals; but since the first is often insufficient, it is necessary to resort to
the second. Therefore, a prince must know how to use both what is proper
to man and what is proper to beasts. The writers of antiquity taught rulers
this lesson allegorically when they told how Achilles and many other
ancient princes were sent to be nurtured by Chiron the centaur, so that he
would train them in his discipline. Their having a creature half-man and
half-beast as tutor only means that a prince must know how to use both the
one and the other nature, and that the one without the other cannot endure.

Since a prince, then, is required to know how to assume a beastlike

nature, he must adopt that of the fox and that of the lion; for a lion is
defenseless against snares, and a fox is defenseless against wolves. Hence a
prince ought to be a fox in recognizing snares and a lion in driving off
wolves. Those who assume the bearing of the lion alone lack understanding.
It follows, then, that a wise prince cannot and should not keep his pledge

when it is against his interest to do so and when his reasons for making the
pledge are no longer operative. If all men were good, this would be a bad
precept, but since they are evil and would not keep a pledge to you, then
you need not keep yours to them. Nor did a prince ever lack legitimate
reasons by which to color his bad faith. One could cite a host of modern
examples and list the many peace treaties, the many promises that were
made null and void by princes who broke faith, with the advantage going to
the one who best knew how to play the fox. But one must know how to
mask this nature skillfully and be a great dissembler. Men are so simple and
so much inclined to obey immediate needs that a deceiver will never lack
victims for his deceptions. Of recent examples proving this, there is one I
will not omit. Pope Alexander VI never gave thought to anything but

deception and never lacked someone on whom to practice it.2 There never
was a man who made promises more persuasively or swore to them more
solemnly and kept so few of them as he. Yet his tricks always brought the
results he desired, for he knew this side of the world well.

Therefore a prince will not actually need to have all the qualities

previously mentioned, but he must surely seem to have them. Indeed, I
would go so far as to say that having them all and always conforming to
them would be harmful, while appearing to have them would be useful.
That is, it will be well for him to seem and, actually, to be merciful, faithful,
humane, frank, and religious. But he should preserve a disposition which
will make a reversal of conduct possible in case the need arises. It must be
understood, however, that a prince—especially a prince who has but
recently attained power—cannot observe all of those virtues for which men
are reputed good, because it is often necessary to act against mercy, against
faith, against humanity, against frankness, against religion in order to
preserve the state. Thus he must be disposed to change according as the
winds of fortune and the alterations of circumstance dictate. As I have
already said, he must stick to the good so long as he can, but, being
compelled by necessity, he must be ready to take the way of evil.

Hence a prince must take care never to utter a word that is not implicit

with the five above-mentioned qualities; and he must never appear to be
anything but the very soul of clemency, faithfulness, frankness, humanity,

and religion to all who see and hear him. But of all the qualities he must
seem to have, none is more important than the last. Generally, men judge by
the eye rather than the hand, for all men can see a thing, but few come close
enough to touch it. All men will see what you seem to be; only a few will
know what you are, and those few will not dare to oppose the many who
have the majesty of the state on their side to defend them. In all men's acts,
and in those of princes most especially, it is the result that renders the
verdict when there is no court of appeal. Let the prince conquer a state,
then, and preserve it; the methods employed will always be judged
honorable, and everyone will praise them. For the mob is always impressed

by appearances and by results; and the world is composed of the mob.3 The
few cannot prevail when the many have someone to rely upon. A certain
ruler of our time, whom it is better not to name, preaches nothing but peace
and faith, yet he is the extreme enemy of both; and if he had been true to
either of them, he would more than once have lost either power or

reputation.4

How to Avoid Contempt and Hatred

HAVING DISCUSSED the more important of the qualities previously
mentioned, I would now like to discuss briefly the others under this general
requirement: that the prince, as I mentioned earlier, endeavor to avoid those
things which would make him the object of hatred and contempt. So long as
he avoids these, he will have done his part and will encounter no risk at all
from other vices. Hatred, as I said before, he will most readily engender by
being rapacious and seizing the property and the women of his subjects.
These he must not touch. The majority of men will be satisfied if he does
not deprive them of their goods or their honor; and then he has only to
contend with the ambitions of the few who may easily be restrained in
many ways. He will engender contempt if he is fickle, frivolous, effeminate,
cowardly, and irresolute. These characteristics he must guard against as
ships guard against reefs; and he should conduct himself in such a way that
greatness, boldness, gravity, and strength will be observed in his actions. In
dealings with individual subjects, his decisions must be irrevocable; and he
must maintain himself in such high regard that no one will ever think of
cheating him or misleading him.

A prince who gives this sort of account of himself will be highly

esteemed; and against someone who is highly esteemed, conspiracy is
unlikely. Attack is also unlikely, so long as he is known to be respected by
his subjects as an excellent man. For a prince has only two things to fear:
one is internal and concerns his subjects; the other is external and concerns

foreign powers. From the latter he protects himself with reliable troops and
reliable allies—and he will always have reliable allies if he has reliable
troops. Moreover, he will always enjoy quiet within his kingdom if there is
quiet outside of it, unless it is disturbed by conspiracy. And even if foreign
forces move against him, so long as he has things in order and has lived as I
directed and, furthermore, keeps up his spirit, he will repel any attack, just

as Nabis the Spartan did.1

As for his subjects, when there is no external attack, the prince must

worry about hidden conspiracies, against which he will find security by
avoiding hatred and contempt and by keeping the people satisfied. It is
essential that he do this, as I have already explained at length. Indeed, the
most potent remedy a prince can have against conspiracies lies in his not
being hated by the populace, for those who conspire always believe that the
death of the prince will please the people. When they suspect that their
action will anger the people, they will not be so rash as to undertake it. The
difficulties that conspirators face are very numerous; and experience shows
that, though there have been many conspiracies, few have succeeded. A
conspirator cannot act alone, yet he cannot seek for associates except
among those who are disaffected. As soon as he has revealed his intentions
to one of these, he has already provided that person with the means to
remedy his dissatisfaction. Obviously, the recipient of a conspirator's
confidence can hope for every advantage. In fact, seeing success assured on
the one hand and seeing it encumbered with doubt and danger on the other,
he must needs be either a very rare friend of the conspirator or a very
obstinate enemy of the prince if he keeps his faith.

To put matters briefly, I say that on his side the conspirator has nothing

but fear, jealousy, and the dread of pain, which demoralize him; while on
his side the prince has the majesty of state, the law, his allies, and his
government, which defend him. If the good will of the people is added to
these advantages, it is impossible that anyone will be so rash as to conspire
against him; for ordinarily a conspirator's fears endure only up to the
perpetration of his evil intentions; but in this instance, with the people
arrayed against him, he must fear the aftermath as well, and he cannot hope
to find a safe refuge anywhere.

To support this, one could cite countless examples, but I will be content

with one that happened within the memory of our fathers.2 When Messer
Annibale Bentivogli, grandfather of the present Annibale, was ruler in
Bologna, the Canneschi clan formed a conspiracy and murdered him; and
even though no members of his family survived except the infant Giovanni,
the people rose up and slew all of the Canneschi. This was a consequence of
the popularity the Bentivogli then enjoyed in Bologna. Their popularity was
so great, in fact, that, with no member of the family left to rule in Bologna,
the people sent to Florence where, according to report, there was an
illegitimate offspring of the Bentivogli who had been brought up by a
blacksmith. They summoned him back to Bologna and entrusted him with
the rule until Giovanni reached his majority.

I conclude, then, that a prince need take little account of conspiracies if

the people are disposed in his favor. If they are opposed and hate him,
however, he must fear every incident and every individual. All well-ordered
states and all wise princes have been diligent in seeking to avoid
exasperating the nobles and in keeping the common people satisfied. For
this is one of the most important duties that falls to a prince.

Among well-organized and well-governed kingdoms in our time there is

France. It has a great many laws and governing bodies upon which the
freedom and security of the king can rely. Of these, the first is the

parliament and the authority entrusted to it.3 For whoever planned the
government of that kingdom recognized the ambition and insolence of the
nobles and concluded that a bridle was needed to curb them. He also
recognized the hatred of the nobles which fear had engendered among the
common people, and he concluded that the latter needed reassurances. But
he decided that neither of these duties should fall to the king, for if it did,
the king would lose the favor of either one side or the other, according as he
judged the controversies that arose between them. He decided instead that
there should be a third tribunal which, without burdening the crown, should
restrain the nobles and support the common people. There surely could
have been no better, no more prudent arrangement than this, nor any greater
source of security for the king. From it a noteworthy lesson may be drawn:

princes should delegate unpopular duties to others while dispensing all
favors directly themselves. I say again that a prince must respect the
nobility, but avoid the hatred of the common people.

In reviewing the lives and deaths of certain Roman emperors, someone

might suppose that their examples serve to disprove my opinion, seeing that
some of them led thoroughly honorable lives, showed great courage, and
yet lost the empire or were conspired against and murdered by their
subjects. In answering such an objection, I should like to discuss the
character of some of these emperors and demonstrate that the causes of
their downfall do not conflict with what I have adduced. At the same time I
shall set forth certain other considerations that ought to be noted by those
who study the events of those times. For the purpose, it will suffice to take
all the emperors from Marcus the Philosopher to Maximinus—that is,
Marcus Aurelius, his son Commodus, Pertinax, Didius Julianus, Septimius
Severus, his son Antoninus Caracalla, Macrinus, Elagabalus, Alexander

Severus, and Maximinus.4

First, it should be noted that, whereas princes normally have only to

contend with the ambition of the powerful and the insolence of the
populace, the Roman emperors had a third problem to deal with: they had to
contend with the cruelty and rapacity of their soldiers. This was so difficult
a task that it proved the downfall of many. For it was hard to satisfy the
soldiery and the people at the same time. The people loved peace and
therefore loved moderate rulers; the soldiers loved rulers endowed with
military spirit—insolent, cruel, and rapacious—who would employ these
qualities against the people to gain them double wages and otherwise give
vent to their own avarice and ferocity. The result of these circumstances
was that those emperors whose experience or natural endowments had not
earned them a great reputation by which to restrain both the soldiers and the
people inevitably fell from power. The majority of them, especially those
who were inexperienced with power, chose to please the soldiers and cared
little about offending the people when they saw the difficulty of satisfying
both sides. It was a necessary choice, for when princes cannot avoid being
hated by one party or another, they must first seek to avoid the hatred of the
general population. If they are unable to do this, however, then they must

seek to avoid the hatred of that part of the population which is the stronger.
Thus, those emperors who had but newly come to power, and were
therefore in need of special support, turned to the soldiers rather than to the
people. The result, whether they succeeded or failed, then depended upon
their ability to keep the support of the soldiers.

For these reasons, of the three emperors, Marcus Aurelius, Pertinax, and

Alexander Severus—all of whom lived moderately, loved justice, hated
cruelty, behaved humanely and courteously—only Marcus escaped an

unhappy end.5 Only Marcus lived and died with honor because he came to
the purple by right of succession and owed it neither to the soldiers nor to
the people. Moreover, being endowed with many virtues that won him
respect, he was able to keep both the people and the soldiers within bounds
without ever arousing hatred or contempt. Pertinax, however, was made
emperor against the wishes of the soldiers, who, having grown accustomed

to licentious living under Commodus,6 could not bear the sort of decent
conduct to which he sought to restrict them. Thus having aroused hatred, to
which contempt was added because of his old age, Pertinax fell at the very
outset of his administration.

Here it is worth noting that hatred may be engendered by good deeds as

well as by bad ones. Therefore, as I said before, a prince who wishes to
remain in power is often forced to be other than good. When the group
whose support he deems vital to his survival is corrupt—be it the common
people, the soldiers, or the nobility—he must follow their inclinations in
order to satisfy them. In such a case, good deeds become his enemies.

But let us consider Alexander Severus, who was such a good man that

among other praiseworthy acts attributed to him there is this one: in all
fourteen years of his reign not a single person was executed without trial.
Nonetheless, because he was reputed effeminate and submissive to his
mother's rule, he fell into contempt, whereupon the army plotted against
him and slew him.

If, on the other hand, we consider the characters of Commodus,

Septimius Severus, Antoninus Caracalla, and Maximinus, we will find them

all very cruel and rapacious. In order to please the soldiers they allowed
them to commit every possible kind of outrage upon the people; and, except
for Septimius Severus, all of them came to a bad end. Severus was such an
able man that by keeping the good will of his soldiers he was able to reign

with continued success, even though he oppressed the people.7 His abilities
aroused such wonder among both the soldiers and the people that, in a
manner of speaking, the former remained respectful and satisfied while the
latter were left astonished and amazed. Now, because this man's actions
were especially outstanding and impressive for one who had newly come to
power, I would like to point out briefly how well he could adopt the
methods of the fox and the lion which, as I said earlier, a prince must needs
imitate.

When Severus recognized the cowardliness of Emperor Didius Julianus,8

he persuaded the army he was commanding in Slavonia that it should return
to Rome and avenge the death of Pertinax, who had been murdered by the
Praetorian guards. With this excuse to hide his own aspiration to the throne,
he moved his army toward Rome, reaching Italy even before it was known
that he had set out. Upon his arrival in Rome, the fearful Senate elected him
Emperor and put Julianus to death. With this accomplished as a beginning,
only two obstacles required removal before Severus could be master of the
whole empire. One lay in Asia, where Pescennius Niger, who commanded

the Asiatic legions, had had himself proclaimed Emperor;9 the other lay in

the West, where Albinus, who also aspired to the purple, was stationed.10

Judging it dangerous to reveal himself as an enemy to both, Severus
decided to attack Niger and to deceive Albinus. He wrote to the latter
saying that since he had been elected emperor by the Senate, he wanted
Albinus to be associated with him in that dignity. He presented him with the
title of Caesar and, by consent of the Senate, made him his imperial partner.
Albinus took these gestures to be sincere. But as soon as Severus had
defeated and slain Niger and settled matters in the East, he returned to
Rome, where he complained to the Senate that Albinus, scarcely grateful
for honors received, had treacherously plotted to kill him. As a consequence
Severus felt compelled to punish his partner's ingratitude. Then he marched

off to attack Albinus in France, where he deprived him of his authority and
his life.

Whoever examines this man's actions closely will find him to have been

a very fierce lion and a most wily fox who was feared and respected by
everyone and not hated by any of his troops. No one will marvel that he, but
newly come to authority, was able to retain such great power; for his
reputation protected him against the hatred which the people had conceived
for him as a result of his rapacity. But his son Antoninus Caracalla was also
endowed with some very excellent qualities which astonished the people

and pleased the soldiers.11 He was a soldier who could endure every
hardship, a great despiser of every delicate food and every kind of softness.
These qualities made the soldiers love him. Nevertheless, his cruelty was so
fierce and boundless that by countless executions he substantially reduced

Rome's population, and he massacred the whole of Alexandria's.12 This
made him odious to the entire world, and even those close to him began to
tremble, with the result that he was slain by a centurion in the midst of his

army.13

Here it is to be noted that princes are inescapably exposed to

assassinations of the kind which are the work of desperate men. Anyone
who has no fear of dying can harm them. Yet, since cases of this kind are
very rare, princes have little cause to fear them. They need only avoid doing
serious injury to their personal servants and to such of their aides as they
keep near at hand. This was Caracalla's mistake, for he had shamefully
consigned the centurion's brother to death and daily threatened the
centurion himself with a similar fate, yet he still retained him as a
bodyguard—an imprudent procedure that cost him his life.

But let us turn to Commodus who, as the son and heir of Marcus

Aurelius, could very easily have remained in authority by the simple

expedient of following in his father's footsteps.14 This would have satisfied
soldiers and common people alike. But, possessed of a cruel and bestial
disposition, he chose instead to flatter the troops and encourage their
licentiousness in order to plunder the people. On the other hand, with no

regard for the dignity of his title, he often descended into the arena to
engage in gladiatorial combats, and he indulged in other base pursuits as
well which disgraced the imperial majesty and earned him the scorn of his
soldiers. Then, after he had brought the hatred of the people and the
contempt of the troops upon himself, a plot was hatched against him and he
was murdered.

There remains to discuss the character of Maximinus, a very warlike

man, elevated to the purple by his troops after the murder of Alexander

Severus, whose softness had begun to annoy them.15 Maximinus, however,
did not wear it long because of two factors which made him hateful and
contemptible. One had to do with his base beginnings as a Thracian
shepherd—a fact everywhere well known which invited the general scorn.
The other had to do with his extreme savagery, which became widely
known through the cruelties committed by his prefects in the capital and
elsewhere when he delayed journeying to Rome to take possession of the
imperial seat. Thus the whole world was moved to disdain his base origins
and to fear his ferocity, with the result that first Africa, then the Roman
Senate and people, then all of Italy, and finally his own army, rebelled
against him. Encountering difficulties in their siege of Aquileia, his troops
grew angry at his cruelty and, having little to fear now that he had so many
enemies, they slew him.

I would rather not discuss Elagabalus, or Macrinus, or Julianus, all three

contemptible creatures who were soon put to death.16 Instead, I shall bring
the present discussion to an end by saying that princes of our day have less
difficulty with this matter of making extraordinary concessions to their
troops. Though they may be required to give it some attention, it is soon
settled, because no present-day ruler keeps troops which are closely bound
up with the government and administration of his provinces, as the armies
of the Roman Empire were. Therefore, if it was more necessary in those
days to satisfy the soldiers than the people, this was because the soldiers
had more power than the people. Today, except in the case of the sultans of
Turkey and Egypt, all rulers find it more necessary to satisfy the people
than the soldiers, because the former now have more power than the latter.

I make an exception of the Turkish sultan, who always keeps twelve

thousand infantry and fifteen thousand cavalry troops near at hand upon
whom the security and strength of his kingdom depend. Above everything
else, he must preserve their good will. The same applies to the sultan of
Egypt, who, since his kingdom is entirely in the hands of his soldiers, must
keep them favorably disposed, at whatever cost to the people. It is to be
noted that the Egyptian sultanate differs from every other state and
resembles the Christian papacy, which can be called neither hereditary nor
new because the ruler's successor is not his son but someone elected to the

position by persons authorized to make the selection.17 Since this is an old-
established procedure, the state cannot be called a new one, for none of the
difficulties common to newly established states arise, and the long-standing
laws of the state are set up to receive the new ruler as though he were its
hereditary lord.

But returning to our proper subject, I say that anyone who considers the

present discussion will see that either hatred or contempt brought about the
downfall of the previously named emperors, and he will understand how it
happened that though some chose one line of conduct and others chose its
opposite, each line of conduct brought success to one and failure to the
others. For it was fruitless and damaging that Pertinax and Alexander
Severus, being new rulers, chose to imitate Marcus Aurelius, who had come
to the purple by right of succession. Likewise, it was ruinous for Caracalla,
Commodus, and Maximinus to imitate Septimius Severus when they lacked
the ability to follow in his footsteps. Indeed, a new ruler in a new state
cannot imitate the actions of Marcus Aurelius, and he need not follow those
of Septimius Severus. Instead, he should borrow from Septimius Severus
those actions which are necessary to establish his authority and from
Marcus Aurelius those that are useful and glorious in preserving a state that
is already firmly established.

Whether Fortresses and Many Other Expedients

That Princes Commonly Employ Are Useful or Not

IN ORDER to keep their lands secure, some princes have disarmed their
subjects; others have prompted division within the cities they have
subjugated. Some have nurtured animosities against themselves; others
have sought to win the approval of those they initially distrusted. Some
have erected fortresses; others have destroyed them. Now, although it is
impossible to set down definite judgments on all of these measures without
considering the particular circumstances of the states where they may be
employed, I shall nevertheless discuss them in such broad terms as the
subject itself will allow.

To begin with, there has never been a case of a new prince disarming his

subjects. Indeed, whenever he found them disarmed, he proceeded to arm
them. For by arming your subjects, you make their arms your own. Those
among them who are suspicious become loyal, while those who are already
loyal remain so, and from subjects they are transformed into partisans.
Though you cannot arm them all, nonetheless you increase your safety
among those you leave unarmed by extending privileges to those whom you
arm. Your different treatment of the two categories will make the latter feel
obligated to you, while the former will consider it proper that those who
assume added duties and dangers should receive advantages. When you
disarm your subjects, however, you offend them by showing that, either
from cowardliness or from lack of faith, you distrust them; and either

conclusion will induce them to hate you. Moreover, since it is impossible
for you to remain unarmed, you would have to resort to mercenaries, whose
limitations have already been discussed. Even if such troops were good,
however, they could never be good enough to defend you from powerful
enemies and doubtful subjects. Therefore, as I have said, a new prince in a
newly acquired state has always taken measures to arm his subjects, and
history is full of examples proving that this is so.

But when a prince takes possession of a new state which he annexes as

an addition to his original domain, then he must disarm all the subjects of
that new state except those who helped him to acquire it; and these, as time
and occasion permit, he must seek to render soft and weak. He must arrange
matters in such a way that the arms of the entire state will be in the hands of
soldiers who are native to his original domain.

Our forefathers, especially those who were reputed wise, used to say that

it was necessary to employ internal factionalism to keep possession of

Pistoia and to employ fortresses to keep possession of Pisa.1 For this reason
they fomented party strife in some of their subject cities so as to hold on to
them more easily. This policy may have been all right in those times, when

in a sense Italy enjoyed a condition of balance among its various states.2

But I do not believe it should be set down as a maxim for the present day,
for I do not believe that factions ever do anyone good. In fact, it is
inevitable that a city divided by faction will fall quickly to any approaching
enemy. The weaker side within will always ally itself with the invader, and
the stronger side will not be able to hold out alone.

Adopting the policy just described, Venice, as it appears, fostered Guelf

and Ghibelline factions in her subject cities,3 and though she never allowed
them to come to bloodshed, she nevertheless encouraged enough dissension
to keep the citizens quarreling among themselves and, therefore, unable to
unite against her. As we can see, this did not turn out to her advantage, for

when she was routed at Vailà,4 one of these factions immediately rose up
and deprived her of all her territories. Moreover, this policy argues
weakness in the prince, for such divisions are never tolerated in a strong

state. They are advantageous only in time of peace because they make it
easy to control one's subjects. But when there is war, the inherent weakness
of this policy becomes apparent.

Princes become great, doubtless, by overcoming opposition and by

removing obstacles that are set in their way. Therefore, when fortune wants
to bestow greatness on a new prince, who has more need of fame than
hereditary princes do, she creates enemies and urges them on to attack him
so that he may have cause to vanquish them; and thus he scales the heights
with ladders they themselves provide for him. For this reason many believe
that, when occasion serves, a wise prince will cunningly provoke opposition
and then, by routing it, increase his own stature.

Princes, particularly those who are new, have found more loyalty and

usefulness in men whom they held suspect at the inception of their rule than
in men whom they initially trusted. Pandolfo Petrucci, the Lord of Siena,
ruled his state more often with men whom he had suspected than with

others.5 But one cannot speak generally on this matter, because it varies
according to the situation. I shall say only this: that men who are enemies at
the beginning of a new regime and are the sort who need someone to lean
on can always be won over by a prince without any difficulty. And they will
be compelled to serve him with loyalty proportional to their need to cancel
out with deeds the unfavorable opinion he had of them. Hence the prince
will find them more useful than those who, enjoying his confidence, neglect
their duties.

And since the subject demands it, I will not fail to remind any prince who

has acquired a new state by the aid of its inhabitants that he soundly
consider what induced them to assist him; if the reason is not natural
affection for him, but rather dissatisfaction with the former government, he
will find it extremely difficult to keep them friendly, for it will be
impossible to please them. If he will carefully think the matter through in
the light of examples drawn from ancient and modern affairs, he will
understand why it is much easier to win the favor of those who were happy
with their former government, and hence were his enemies, than to keep the

favor of those who, out of dissatisfaction with the former rule, helped him
to replace it.

In order to hold on to their domains with greater safety, princes have

customarily erected fortresses to curb and restrain their enemies and to
provide themselves with a refuge in the event of a sudden attack. Since this
is a procedure that was employed of old, I praise it. Yet in our own time
Messer Niccolò Vitelli is known to have dismantled two of the fortresses in

Città di Castello in order to keep possession of that state.6 When
Guidobaldo, the Duke of Urbino, returned to his domain after having been
driven from it by Cesare Borgia, he razed all its fortresses to their
foundations, feeling that without them there would be less likelihood of his

losing it a second time.7 The Bentivogli took similar measures when they

returned to Bologna.8 Fortresses, then, are useful or useless according to
the circumstances. If they prove helpful on the one hand, they prove
harmful on the other. The matter may be considered as follows.

The prince who fears his subjects more than he fears foreign foes should

erect fortresses; but the prince who fears foreign foes more than he fears his
subjects should disregard them. The castle of Milan which Francesco Sforza
built has caused and will still cause more trouble for the House of Sforza

than any disorders in that state.9 Not to be hated by his subjects is the best
fortress a prince can have. If the people hate him, a fortress will not save
him, for when the people take up arms against him they will never lack for
foreigners to succor them. In our day, fortresses have not profited any ruler
except the Countess of Forlí when her husband, Count Girolamo, was
murdered. Thanks to her fortress, she was able to escape the assaults of the
populace and wait until assistance arrived from Milan to recover her
domains, for on that occasion circumstances were such that no foreigner

could come to succor the people.10 Later, however, when Cesare Borgia
attacked her, and her subjects joined forces with him, the fortress was of
little use to her. Then and previously it would have been better for her if she
had not been hated by the people than to have had the fortress. Everything
considered, therefore, I approve of those who erect fortresses and of those

who do not. But I condemn anyone who, putting his trust in fortresses, will
think it no great matter if he is hated by the people.

What a Prince Must Do to Be Esteemed

NOTHING WINS so much esteem for a prince as embarking on great
enterprises and giving rare proofs of his ability. In our own times, for
example, there is Ferdinand of Aragon, the present King of Spain, who may
almost be called a new prince; setting out as a weak monarch, he proceeded
to win so much renown and glory that he has now become the greatest king
in Christendom. Anyone reviewing his undertakings will find all of them
great, and some even extraordinary. At the start of his reign he attacked

Granada, and that action served as the foundation of his power.1 He began
the campaign when he was free of other concerns and had no fear of being
obstructed. He kept the barons of Castile so preoccupied with it that they
could give no thought to rebellion. Meanwhile he gained standing and
authority over them without their realizing it. With funds supplied by the
Church and by the people, he was able to keep armies in the field and use
that lengthy war as the foundation of his military power which has since
brought him honor. Moreover, in order to embark upon greater enterprises,
always in the name of religion, he resorted to a pious cruelty, despoiling the

Marranos and driving them from his kingdom.2 There could be nothing
more pitiful or unusual than this. Under the same cloak of piety he attacked
Africa; he undertook his Italian campaign; and lastly he has made war on

France.3 Thus he has always planned and executed great things which have
filled his subjects with wonder and admiration and have kept them

preoccupied. One action has grown out of another with such rapidity that
there has never been time in which men could quietly plot against him.

A prince will also find it advantageous to resort to unusual and

distinctive acts in civic matters, like those that are reported about Messer

Bernabò of Milan,4 and whenever someone does something extraordinarily
good or bad in civic life, he should reward or punish him in a manner that
will arouse considerable comment. Above all, by every one of his actions a
prince should strive to win renown as a great man of excellent ability.

A prince also gains esteem when he acts as a true ally or true enemy, that

is, when he declares himself openly for or against one of two conflicting
parties—a policy that is always better than neutrality. If two of your
neighbors come to blows, it may be that you will have reason to fear the
victor, or it may be that you will not. In any event, you will do well to
declare yourself and fight with determination. For if you do have reason to
fear the victor and do not declare yourself, you will surely become his prey,
to the satisfaction and joy of the losing party. Then you will have no one to
defend you and no one to offer you a refuge. The victor will not want an
uncertain ally who will not be helpful in adversity, and the loser will not
take you in because you were unwilling to risk your arms on his behalf.

When Antiochus invaded Greece to drive out the Romans at the behest of

the Aetolians, he sent envoys to the Achaeans, allies of the Romans, urging
them to remain neutral. At the same time the Romans urged them to take up
arms on their behalf. When the matter was brought to debate in the council
of the Achaeans and Antiochus' envoys argued for their neutrality, the
Roman envoy answered, “What they advise as the best policy, namely, that
you avoid taking part in the war, is indeed contrary to your own interests;
without friendship, without honor, you will become the prize of the

victor.”5

It always turns out that the party that is not your ally calls for your

neutrality, while your ally asks that you declare yourself by action. In order
to avoid immediate peril, an irresolute prince most often embraces
neutrality and most often comes to grief. When you boldly commit yourself

and your ally wins, then even though he is powerful and you are left at his
mercy, he will be under obligation to you, and there will be a bond of
friendship between you. In such cases men are never so shameless, never so
extraordinarily ungrateful as to oppress you. Moreover, victories are never
so complete that the victor remains free of all restraints, especially as
regards justice. On the other hand, if your ally loses, he will take you in and
help you as best he can; and you will then become his partner in fortunes
that may rise again.

When the two opponents are not so powerful that you may have reason to

fear the victor, then it is even more expedient to take sides. Then you will
be taking part in the ruin of one neighbor with the help of another who, if he
were wise, would have fought to save him instead. If your ally wins—and
with your assistance he cannot help but win—then he will be at your mercy.

Here it ought to be noted that a prince should avoid joining forces with

someone more powerful than himself for the purpose of attacking another
unless necessity compels him to do so, as I explained above; for by winning
he then becomes the prisoner of his ally. As far as possible, a prince should
avoid being left at the mercy of someone else. The Venetians joined France
in attacking the Duke of Milan when they could have avoided it, and that

was their downfall.6 But when such an alliance cannot be avoided (as was
the case with the Florentines when the Pope and Spain sent an army to

attack Lombardy),7 then a prince should take part for the reasons already
discussed. And let no state suppose that it can choose sides with complete
safety. Indeed, it had better recognize that it will always have to choose
between risks, for that is the order of things. We never flee one peril without
falling into another. Prudence lies in knowing how to distinguish between
degrees of danger and in choosing the least danger as the best.

A prince should also demonstrate that he loves talent by supporting men

of ability and by honoring those who excel in each craft. Moreover, he
ought to encourage his citizens peaceably to pursue their affairs, whether in
trade, in agriculture, or in any other human activity, so that no one will
hesitate to improve his possessions for fear that they will be taken from

him, and no one will hesitate to open a new avenue of trade for fear of
taxes. Instead, the prince ought to be ready to reward those who do these
things and those who seek out ways of enriching their city or state. In
addition to all this, at the appropriate time of year, he ought to keep the
people occupied with festivals and spectacles; and since every city is
divided into guilds or other corporate bodies, he ought to take these into
account and assemble with them on occasions, thus giving proof of his
affability and munificence, yet never failing to bear the dignity of his
position in mind, for this must never be lacking.

Concerning the Prince's Ministers

A MATTER of no small importance to a prince is the selection of ministers,
for their competence or incompetence will depend upon his capacity to
judge; and the first estimate of his intelligence will be based upon the
character of the men he keeps about him. If they are capable and loyal, he
will be reputed wise, for he will have demonstrated that he knows how to
recognize their ability and keep them loyal to him. If they are otherwise, he
will be judged unfavorably, for the first mistake a ruler can make lies in the
selection of his ministers. No one who knew Antonio da Venafro, the
minister of Pandolfo Petrucci, Lord of Siena, could have supposed the latter

to be anything but a very able man, since he had chosen such a minister.1

Minds are of three kinds: one is capable of thinking for itself; another is

able to understand the thinking of others; and a third can neither think for
itself nor understand the thinking of others. The first is of the highest
excellence, the second is excellent, and the third is worthless. It follows,
then, that if Pandolfo's mind was not of the first kind, it was surely of the
second. For when a prince can discern what is good and bad in the words
and deeds of another, he will be able to distinguish between his minister's
good and bad performance, praising the one and correcting the other, even
though he lacks an inventive mind himself. Then the minister cannot hope
to deceive him and will work reliably.

Now, as to the means by which a prince may learn the character of a

minister, there is one that never fails. When you see a minister who thinks
more about his own interests than about yours, who seeks his own
advantage in everything he does, then you may be sure that such a man will
never be a good minister, and you will never be able to trust him. For the
man upon whom the charge of a state rests must never think of himself, but
always of the prince, and he must never think of anything but what
concerns the prince. On the other hand, in order to keep him loyal, the
prince must think of his minister, honoring him, enriching him, placing him
under obligation, sharing both distinctions and duties with him, so that his
minister will recognize that he cannot do without the prince, so that his
many honors and abundant wealth will prevent his desiring more, and his
many responsibilities will cause him to fear a change of government. When
the relations between ministers and princes stand thus, they may trust one
another, and when they stand otherwise, the result will always be disastrous
to both.

How to Avoid Flatterers

ONE IMPORTANT point I do not want to overlook concerns a failing
against which princes cannot easily protect themselves unless they are
especially prudent or have good advisers. I refer to the flatterers with whom
the courts of princes are crowded. Because men are so easily pleased with
their own qualities and are so readily deceived in them, they have difficulty
in guarding against these pests, and in attempting to guard against them,
they run the risk of being scorned. For there is no way of avoiding flattery
except by letting men know that they will not offend by telling the truth; yet
if every man is free to tell you the truth, you will not receive due respect.

Therefore a prudent prince will pursue a third course, choosing the wise

men of his state and granting only to them the freedom to tell him the truth,
but only concerning those matters about which he asks, and no others. Yet
he should question them about all matters, listen to their opinions, and then
decide for himself as he wishes. He should treat these councils and the
individual advisers in such a way as to make it clear that their words will be
the more welcome the more freely they are spoken. Except for these men,
he should listen to no one, but rather pursue the course agreed upon and do
so resolutely. Anyone who does otherwise will fall victim to flatterers or, as
a result of the various opinions he hears, will often change his mind and
thereby lose reputation.

Regarding this, I should like to cite a recent example. Pre' Luca,1 the

ambassador of Maximilian, the present emperor, used to say that His
Majesty never sought counsel from anyone, yet never did anything as he
wished to do it. This grows out of his acting contrary to what has just been
suggested. Being a very secretive man, the Emperor never consults anyone
and never reveals his intentions. But as soon as he begins to put them into
effect, they are discovered. Then they are opposed by the men he has about
him, and, lacking resolution, he is easily dissuaded from them. The result is
that what he does on one day he destroys on the next, and it is never
possible to know what he is seeking or planning, or to have any confidence
in his decisions.

A prince, therefore, should always seek advice, but only when he, not

someone else, chooses. Indeed, he should discourage everyone from giving
advice unless he has asked for it. In fact, if he should observe that someone
is withholding the truth for some reason, he should show annoyance. Since
many people believe that some princes are reputed wise, thanks rather to
their wise counselors than to their own natural gifts, they ought to be told
that they deceive themselves. For this is a general rule that never fails: a
prince who is not wise himself cannot be wisely counseled, unless by
chance he should have a sole counselor by whom he is ruled in all matters.
There could be such a situation, but it would not last long, for the counselor
would soon deprive the prince of his state. An unwise prince, having to
consider the advice of several counselors, would never receive concordant
opinions, and he would not be able to reconcile them on his own. His
counselors would pursue their own interests and he would know neither
how to rule them nor how to understand them. They could not do otherwise,
for men will always prove bad unless necessity compels them to be good.
Therefore I conclude that good advice, no matter where it comes from,
ultimately derives from the prudence of the prince, and the prudence of the
prince does not derive from good advice.

Why the Princes of Italy Have Lost Their States

WISELY PURSUED, the advice I have given above will make a new prince
appear to have been long established in his state, and it will bind him more
securely and more firmly to it than if he had actually been long established
there. The actions of a new prince are more closely watched than those of a
hereditary prince, and when they are recognized to be fitting and able, they
win men over and compel their allegiance more than ancient lineage does;
for men are more taken with the present than with the past. When they find
themselves well off in the present, they enjoy it and seek nothing more.
Indeed, so long as the prince does not neglect his duties, they will undertake
to defend him in every way. Thus he will win a double glory for having
initiated a new rule and for having endowed and strengthened it with sound
laws, sound arms, and sound examples—just as he who, having been born a
prince and having lost his dominion through imprudence, wins a double
disgrace.

If we consider those rulers in Italy who have lost their dominions in our

time—the King of Naples, the Duke of Milan,1 and others, we will first of
all find a common defect in them regarding arms, as I have already

explained at length,2 then we will find that they either alienated their people
or, having kept them favorably disposed, failed to secure themselves against
the nobility. Without these defects, states that have the strength to put an
army in the field are not lost. Philip the Macedonian—not the father of
Alexander, but the one who was defeated by Titus Quintius—ruled a state

that was weak in contrast to the Roman and Greek powers that attacked
him. Yet because he was a soldier who knew how to satisfy the people and
secure himself against the nobles, he was able to endure many years of
warfare against them. And if in the end he lost possession of some cities, he

nonetheless kept possession of his kingdom.3

Therefore these princes of ours who were long in possession of their

states must not blame fortune but rather their own sluggishness for having
lost them. Because throughout the years of peace they had never considered
that the times might change (for it is a common failing of men not to take
account of tempests during fair weather), when adversity struck they
thought of flight instead of defense, and they hoped that the people, irritated
by the insolence of the victors, would summon them to return. This is a
good refuge when all others are lacking, but it is foolish to abandon other
expedients for it. No one should ever allow himself to fall down in the
belief that someone else will lift him to his feet, because it will not happen;
or if it does happen, it will not prove to his advantage. Such a means of
defense is cowardly, in that it does not derive from one's own initiative, and
only those methods of defense which depend upon one's own
resourcefulness are good, certain, and enduring.

Concerning the Influence of Fortune in Human

Affairs, and the Manner in Which It Is to Be

Resisted

I AM not unaware that many men have believed and still believe that the
affairs of the world are controlled by fortune and by God in such a way that
the prudence of men cannot manage them, and indeed cannot improve them
at all. For this reason they are inclined to think that there is no point in
sweating much over these matters and that they should submit to chance
instead. As a consequence of the great changes, exceeding every human
expectation, that have been and are still seen daily, this opinion has had
wider acceptance in our day than heretofore. Thinking about it, I myself
have sometimes been inclined to concur with this judgment in some
measure.

Nevertheless, since our free will must not be denied, I estimate that even

if fortune is the arbiter of half our actions, she still allows us to control the
other half, or thereabouts. I compare fortune to one of those torrential rivers
which, when enraged, inundates the lowlands, tears down trees and
buildings, and washes out the land on one bank to deposit it on the other.
Everyone flees before it; everyone yields to its assaults without being able
to offer it any resistance. Even though it behaves this way, however, it does
not mean that men cannot make provision during periods of calm by
erecting levees and dikes to channel the rising waters when they come, or at
least restrain their fury and reduce the danger.

The same may be said about fortune, which tends to show her strength

where no resources are employed to check her. She turns her course toward
those points where she knows there are no levees or dikes to restrain her.
Now, if we consider Italy, the scene and the agent of the changes I have
referred to, we will observe that she is a land without bulwarks or any other
defenses, for if she were guarded by suitable forces, as Germany, France,
and Spain are, then these inundations would not have produced such
enormous changes, or they would not have occurred at all. Let it suffice to
have said this much about opposition to fortune in general.

But limiting myself to particulars, I would like to point out why it is that

we see a prince safely in power on one day and overthrown on the next,
though there has been no change in his character or behavior. This derives
first of all, I think, from those causes which I explained at length some time
back—that is, from the fact that a prince who relies entirely upon fortune
will fail when his fortune changes. It also derives, I think, from the fact that
a prince is successful when he fits his mode of proceeding to the times, and
is unsuccessful when his mode of proceeding is no longer in tune with
them. We note that men pursue the ends they have in view, that is, glory and
wealth, by different ways. One uses caution while another is impetuous, one
resorts to violence while another relies on craft, one acts patiently while
another does the contrary; and each reaches his goal by a different route.
We also note that of two men who employ caution one will gain his
objective while the other will not, or that both will gain their objectives by
different means, one by being cautious, the other by being impetuous. The
cause of this is nothing other than the character of the times to which these
modes of conduct may or may not be suited. It is this, as I have said, that
explains how two men using different methods will achieve the same
results, and two others using similar methods will achieve contrary results
—the one succeeding, the other failing.

This also explains the inconstancy of prosperity. If one is cautious and

patient in his method of proceeding and the times lend themselves to this
kind of policy, he will prosper. But if the times and circumstances change,
he will fail, for he will not alter his policy. There is no man so prudent that
he can accommodate himself to these changes, because no one can go

contrary to the way nature has inclined him, and because, having always
prospered in pursuing a particular method, he will not be persuaded to
depart from it. Hence, when the times require it, the cautious man will not
know how to act impetuously and he will be overthrown. If he were able to
adapt his nature to changing times and circumstances, however, his fortunes
would not change.

Pope Julius II acted impetuously in everything he undertook, and he

found the times and circumstances so well suited to this way of acting that
he always met with success. Consider his first campaign against Bologna

when Messer Giovanni Bentivogli was still living.1 The Venetians did not
like it; neither did Spain. Negotiations were still going on about it with
France. Nevertheless, with characteristic fierceness and haste he set the
campaign in motion, leading it in person. This suddenness reduced the
Venetians and Spain to inaction, the one because of fear and the other
because it hoped to recover the lost territories of the Kingdom of Naples. It
also had the effect of involving the King of France who, being desirous of
the Pope's help in defeating the Venetians, concluded that he could not deny
him troops without manifestly injuring him.

Thus, by his impetuous action, Pope Julius achieved what no other

pontiff would have achieved by all possible prudence. If he had delayed his
departure from Rome until everything had been settled and arranged, as
another pontiff would have done, he would never have succeeded, because
the King of France would have made a thousand excuses and the others a
thousand threats to thwart the enterprise. I will not speak of his other
ventures, for they were all alike and all of them succeeded well. His short
life spared him any contrary experiences. If the time had come when
caution would have been required, it would have brought his downfall, for
he would never have abandoned those methods to which his own nature
inclined him.

Therefore, since fortune changes while human beings remain constant in

their methods of conduct, I conclude that men will succeed so long as
method and fortune are in harmony and they will fail when these are no
longer in harmony. But I surely think that it is better to be impetuous than to

be cautious, for fortune is a woman and in order to be mastered she must be
jogged and beaten. And it may be noted that she submits more readily to
boldness than to cold calculation. Therefore, like a woman, she always
favors young men because they are not so much inclined to caution as to
aggressiveness and daring in mastering her.

An Exhortation to Free Italy from the Hands of the

Barbarians

HAVING DULY pondered everything so far discussed and having asked
myself whether the present circumstances of Italy were auspicious for
honoring a new prince and whether conditions were potentially suited for a
prudent and resourceful man to shape them so as to win honor for himself
and well-being for her people, I have concluded that so many things favor a
new prince that I can think of no more fitting time for this purpose. And, as
I said before, if the Israelites had to be in Egyptian bondage before Moses
could demonstrate his resourcefulness, if the Persians had to be oppressed
by the Medes before Cyrus could make manifest his greatness of spirit, if
the Athenians had to be scattered before Theseus could display his

excellence1—then, before the resourcefulness of an Italian spirit could be
made known in the present, Italy had to be reduced to her present state,
more enslaved than the Hebrews, more servile than the Persians, more
scattered than the Athenians, leaderless, disordered, beaten, despoiled,
bruised, trampled, subjected to every kind of injury.

And although there may have been someone before now who aroused

some glimmer of hope that he had been ordained by God for her
redemption, still we afterward saw how fortune rejected him at the critical

point of his enterprise.2 Thus, left almost lifeless, Italy awaits the arrival of
someone who may heal her wounds, put an end to the sacking of Lombardy,

to the exactions of tribute from the Kingdom of Naples and from Tuscany
and cure her long-festering sores. See how she prays God to send her
someone who will rescue her from barbarian insolence and cruelty. See, too,
how ready and anxious she is to rally to any banner, so long as there is
someone to raise it aloft.

Nor is it possible to see where she may look more hopefully at present

than to your illustrious house which, with its fortunes and merits favored by
God and by the Church it now rules, can provide the leadership for her

redemption.3 The task will not be difficult if you will keep before you the
lives and deeds of those I have just named. And although they were rare and
extraordinary men, yet they were men, and each had less opportunity than
the present occasion affords. Their task was neither more just nor easier
than this one, nor did God favor them more than he favors you. There is
great justice in this cause, “iustum enim est bellum quibus necessarium, et

pia arma ubi nulla nisi in armis spes est.”4 There is great readiness here,
and where there is great readiness, there can be no great difficulty, so long
as your house will seek to emulate those whom I have proposed as models.
Moreover, unparalleled wonders have been seen, wrought by God. The sea
has parted, a cloud has shown the way, a stone has poured forth water,

manna has rained down from the sky;5 all things have conspired to show
your greatness. The rest you must do yourself. God is unwilling to do
everything Himself lest He deprive us of our free will and of that portion of
glory that belongs to us.

And there is no reason to marvel if the Italians previously referred to

failed to achieve what may be hoped for from your house, or if, in so many
revolutions and in so many exploits of arms, Italian military prowess has
repeatedly appeared to have become extinct. This derives from the fact that
the old ordinances are no good and there has been no one capable of
establishing new ones. Nothing so much honors a man newly come to
power as the new laws and new ordinances he brings into being. Such
things, when they are well based and impressive in scope, win reverence
and admiration; and in Italy there is no lack of matter awaiting the impress
of new forms. The individual members here show great qualities when the

same are not lacking in their leaders. Consider duels and combats involving
few men and note how superior Italians are in strength, in nimbleness, and
in skill. But when it comes to armies they do not show up well. This stems
from the weakness of their leaders. The competent ones are not obeyed, and
everyone thinks he is competent because no one up to now has been able to
stand out so clearly above the other leaders in skill and fortune that they
would yield to him. The result has been that over a long span of time, in the
many wars that have been fought in the past twenty years, every all-Italian
army involved in them has made a bad showing. The first proof of this
came at the Taro, then at Alessandria, Capua, Genoa, Vailà, Bologna, and

Mestre.6

Therefore, if your illustrious house wishes to emulate the great men who

have redeemed their countries, you must above all provide yourself with
troops of your own as the true foundation of every undertaking; for there
cannot be more loyal, truer, or better soldiers than these. If each of them is
individually effective, they will be even more effective as a unit when they
see themselves commanded by their own prince, who favors and honors
them. Hence it is necessary to plan to have such troops so that Italian valor
will be able to defend us from the foreigner.

Though the Swiss and Spanish infantry are considered very formidable,

each has a weakness that would enable a third kind of infantry not only to
oppose them but confidently to overcome them. The Spanish cannot sustain
cavalry attacks, while the Swiss are fearful of any as determined as their
own. Thus it has been observed, and experience will prove it, that the
Spanish infantry cannot withstand a French cavalry attack, and the Swiss
infantry can be routed by the Spanish. Though experience has not actually
shown this last assertion to be true, nevertheless there was a hint of it at the
Battle of Ravenna, where the Spanish infantry confronted the German

battalions, which are the same kind as the Swiss.7 There the Spaniards,
aided by their agility and their bucklers, broke in under the long pikes of the
Germans and attacked them with impunity, leaving them with no recourse.
And if the cavalry had not dislodged them, the Spaniards would have slain
them all. Having recognized the defects of both these orders of infantry, one

can devise a new kind which will withstand cavalry forces and not be afraid
of other infantry. This can be accomplished by the creation of new weapons
and by changes in military formations. It is things of this kind which, newly
introduced, bestow fame and greatness on a new prince.

This opportunity, therefore, must not be allowed to pass, so that Italy

after so long a time may find her redeemer. I cannot describe with how
much love, with what thirst for revenge, with what resolute loyalty, with
what tenderness, with what tears he would be received in all those
provinces which have endured these foreign hordes. What gates would be
closed to him? What people would deny him obedience? Whose envy
would oppose him? What Italian would withhold his allegiance? This
barbarian domination stinks in everyone's nostrils. Let your illustrious
house take up this task, then, with that boldness and with that hope which is
reserved to just enterprises, so that this nation may be ennobled under your
banner and so that under your auspices the words Petrarch wrote may come
true:

Against barbarian rage, Virtue will take the field; then short the
fight; True to their lineage, Italian hearts will prove their Roman
might.

Discourses Upon the First Ten Books of Titus Livy

Book One

2. Of the Various Kinds of States and of What Kind

the Roman Republic Was

I WANT to leave aside any discussion of cities which from their outset
were subject to foreigners, and I shall speak instead of those which came

into being entirely free of external domination and governed themselves as
they chose, either as republics or principalities, by diverse laws and
ordinances according to their diverse origins. For some, either at their
founding or shortly after, were given laws all at one time, as Lycurgus gave

them to the Spartans,1 while others acquired theirs by chance at different
times as the result of particular events. Happy is that state which produces a
man prudent enough to provide it with laws and institutions by which it
may live securely without any need to alter them. We note that Sparta
observed her laws for eight hundred years without corrupting them and
without experiencing any dangerous disorders. Less happy, to a degree, is
that state which, having found no prudent lawgiver, has been compelled to
devise its own laws. Still less happy is the one which is further removed
from civic order; and least happy of all is the one whose institutions are
entirely off the path that leads to a right and perfect end. For states in this
last case, it is scarcely possible that their institutions will be set right by
some event or other. Those that are not perfectly ordered but have made a
proper beginning conducive to improvement may by circumstance become
perfect. But this is surely true: they will never be reorganized without
running into danger, for the majority of men will not accept new laws
designed to introduce new institutions in the state unless they are shown the
necessity for them. Since such a necessity cannot arise except in event of
danger, it is likely that the state will perish before it is ever brought to a
perfect order. Ample proof of this is the republic of Florence, which was
reorganized in 1502 as a result of events in Arezzo and was overthrown in

1512 as a result of events in Prato.2

In wishing to discuss Rome's form of government and the events that led

to its perfection, I must observe that some who have written about states
have asserted that these take three forms—monarchical, aristocratic, and
democratic—and that those who organize the government of a state must
turn to the one of these which seems most suitable. Still other writers,
whom many consider even wiser, assert that there are six kinds of
government, of which three are bad and three others, though good in
themselves, are so easily corrupted that they too must be deemed
pernicious. The good ones are the three forms mentioned above. Each of the

three bad ones are parallel to one of them, and each so closely resembles its
like that the leap from the one to the other is easy; for monarchy easily
becomes tyranny, aristocracy easily becomes oligarchy, and democracy
easily converts to anarchy. Thus anyone organizing a government according
to one of the good forms does so for but a short time, because no precaution
will prevent it from slipping into its opposite, so closely are the virtues and
vices of the two related.

These various kinds of government came into existence among men by

chance, for in the beginning of the world, the inhabitants being few, they
lived dispersed for a time in the manner of beasts. Then, as the population
increased, they drew together and, the better to defend themselves, they
sought out the strongest and bravest one among them, made him their
leader, and obeyed him. From this beginning came a recognition of what is
proper and good, as opposed to what is pernicious and wicked. Seeing a
benefactor injured, men came to feel hatred and sympathy. They censured
the ungrateful and praised those who showed gratitude. Realizing that
similar injuries could be done to them, they decided to make laws to
prevent this and to ordain punishments for those who violated them. From
this came the recognition of justice. Thereafter, when it came time to elect a
ruler, men no longer sought the boldest man among them but the most
prudent and just instead. But when, later on, rulers came to power by
succession instead of by election, the inheritors of power soon degenerated
and, abandoning the pursuit of worthy deeds, they came to feel that the
prince had nothing to do except exceed all others in sumptuous living,
lascivious behavior, and every other kind of license. Thus it happened that
the prince began to be hated, began to fear; and thus passing quickly from
fear to overt injury, he soon became a tyrant. This was the beginning of
disorders, conspiracies, and plots against princes, initiated not by weak and
timid men, but by those who, exceeding all others in generosity,
magnanimity, wealth, and nobility, could not endure their prince's
dishonorable conduct. Under the leadership of these powerful men, the
masses took up arms and, having removed the prince, gave their allegiance
to them as their liberators. Despising the very name of a single chief, these
men constituted themselves a government; and at the beginning, mindful of
the tyranny that had just been ended, they ruled in accordance with the laws

they instituted, subordinating every personal advantage to the common
good, governing and protecting both private and public matters with utmost
care. When the administration passed to their sons, who had never known
the vicissitudes of fortune or experienced wrongs and had become weary of
civic equality, they gave way to greed, to ambition, to seizing women; and
thus they transformed the government from an aristocracy into an oligarchy
which had no regard for any civic right. Consequently, within a short time
they suffered the same fate as the tyrant. Exasperated with their
government, the masses were at the disposal of anyone designing in any
way to attack their rulers; and soon someone came forward who with their
help put an end to them. Having just destroyed a government of the few and
having no desire to restore the rule of a prince—the memory of their former
prince and of his offenses still being fresh in their minds—the masses had
recourse to a democratic form of government. This they organized in such a
way that neither the few nor a single prince would have any authority in it.
And since all governments enjoy some respect at their outset, this
democratic government survived for a time, but not for long, especially
after the generation which had established it passed on. For anarchy,
respectful of neither private citizens nor public men, soon followed, with
the result that, each person acting as he pleased, every day saw a thousand
wrongs committed. Thus, either through necessity or through the suggestion
of some good man or through the desire to bring anarchy to an end, they
returned to the rule of a prince. From here they moved step by step toward
anarchy again, in the manner and for the reasons just described.

This is the cycle through which the governments of all states pass and

have passed. Rarely, however, do they actually return to the same forms, for
scarcely any state has the vitality to undergo many of these mutations and
still survive. What will often happen is that at some moment of crisis,
lacking both counsel and strength, the state will be subjugated by some
neighboring one which enjoys better rule. If such did not occur, a state
would be capable of passing through these various forms of government an
infinite number of times.

I say, therefore, that all these kinds of government are harmful in

consequence of the short life of the three good ones and the viciousness of

the three bad ones. Having noted these failings, prudent lawgivers rejected
each of these forms individually and chose instead to combine them into
one that would be firmer and more stable than any, since each form would
serve as a check upon the others in a state having monarchy, aristocracy,
and democracy at one and the same time.

Among those who have merited praise for employing such a

constitutional form is Lycurgus, who, by setting up the laws of Sparta in
such a way as to provide a place for king, aristocracy, and people, created a
state which lasted more than eight hundred years, bringing great credit to
him and peace to his city. In establishing the laws of Athens, Solon did the
contrary, for by organizing a popular government, he created one which was
so short-lived that even before his death it gave way to tyranny under

Pisistratus.3 Though the latter's heirs were driven out forty years later and
Athens returned to liberty, because it again adopted the popular form Solon
had given it, it did not last more than a hundred years, despite the many
changes of constitution designed to repress the arrogance of the rich and the
license of the multitude, which Solon had not foreseen. Despite all this, by
comparison with Sparta's, the government of Athens endured but a short
time because Solon had failed to provide a place in it for monarchical and
aristocratic power.

But let us turn to Rome. Though it lacked a Lycurgus at its outset to

organize it in such a way that it could long enjoy freedom, in consequence
of disagreements between the plebs and the Senate it experienced so many
internal vicissitudes that chance provided what a legislator had failed to
provide. If Rome was not among the very most fortunate states, it was
surely among the second most fortunate. If her first institutions were
defective, still they did not deviate so far from the right direction that they
could not be brought to perfection. Both Romulus and the other kings
established many good laws compatible with a condition of freedom. But
since their aim had been to found a kingdom and not a republic, when the
city obtained its freedom it still lacked many things necessary for the
furtherance of freedom, which the kings had failed to establish. And though
the kings lost their sovereignty for the reasons previously discussed,
nevertheless those who drove them from power by quickly appointing two

consuls to serve in place of the king, in effect drove only the name of king
and not the royal power out of Rome. Thus, having the consuls and the
Senate, the state came to combine two of the three aforementioned forms of
government, that is, monarchy and aristocracy. Only popular government
lacked a place. And when the Roman nobility became insolent, for reasons I
shall explain below, the people rose up against them, so that in order that all
should not be lost, it was found necessary to assign them their part, while
the Senate and the consuls retained enough power to preserve their position
in the state. Thus the Tribunes of the plebs were created, and the state
attained greater stability because all three forms of government now had a

share in it.4 And fortune proved so favorable that, though the government
did pass by stages from king to aristocrats to the people for reasons I have
already given, nevertheless monarchical power never passed entirely into
the hands of the aristocrats, nor did aristocratic power ever pass completely
into the hands of the people. Retaining its mixed composition, the state thus
reached perfection—a perfection it owed to the dissension between the
plebs and the Senate, as the following two chapters will show.

Republic Became More Perfect

AS ALL those who write about civic matters show and as all history proves
by a multitude of examples, whoever organizes a state and establishes its
laws must assume that all men are wicked and will act wickedly whenever
they have the chance to do so. He must also assume that whenever their
wickedness remains hidden for a time there is a hidden reason for it which
remains unknown for want of occasion to make it manifest. But time, which
is called the father of all truth, uncovers it.

After the Tarquins had been expelled from Rome,1 it seemed that the

plebs and the Senate enjoyed a most harmonious relationship, that the
nobles had put away their characteristic haughtiness and had become
imbued with the spirit of the common people so that even the lowest wretch
found them tolerable. This deception remained hidden for so long as the
Tarquins survived; for the nobles, fearing the Tarquins and fearing that the
plebs, if ill-treated, would seek to make common cause with them, behaved
decently toward the common people. But no sooner had the Tarquins died
and thus removed their cause of fear, than the nobles began to spit out all
the venomous hatred of the plebs which they had kept pent up in their
bosoms, and they injured them in every way they could. This is proof of
what I said above, namely, that men will never do good except by necessity.
Whenever they have the freedom to choose and the chance to act with
abandon, they introduce confusion and chaos everywhere. That is why it is
said that poverty and hunger make men industrious and that laws make men
good. Whenever things go well of themselves there is no need for law; but
as soon as good habit fails, the law must be quickly invoked. Thus, with the
passing of the Tarquins, fear of whom had kept the nobles in check, it
became necessary to introduce a new order which would produce the same

conditions that had obtained while they were still living. Consequently,
after many disorders, alarms, and threats of violence between the plebs and
the nobles, the Tribunes were instituted to provide for the security of the
plebs. These were invested with so many prerogatives and so much
authority that they could always function as mediators between the plebs
and the Senate and put down the insolence of the nobles.

Senate Made the Roman Republic Strong and Free

I DO not want to neglect considering the disorders that occurred in Rome in
the period between the death of the Tarquins and the establishment of the
Tribunes, nor mentioning several things in opposition to the common belief
that Rome was a disorderly republic, full of so much dissension that if
fortune and military prowess had not counterbalanced these defects it would
have been the inferior of all other republics. I cannot deny that fortune and
military prowess were the sources of Roman power. But what the critics I
have referred to fail to see is that wherever there are sound military forces
there must also be sound institutions, and rarely does it happen that there is
not good fortune as well. But let us turn to other particulars regarding that
city.

It seems to me that those who condemn the conflicts between the plebs

and the nobles are condemning the primary source of Rome's liberty and are
giving more consideration to the tumult and the shouting these conflicts
aroused than to the good effects they produced. They fail to observe that
there are two different factions in every republic—the common people and
the aristocrats—and that all laws enacted to increase liberty derive from the
conflict between them, as we can easily see from what happened in Rome.

From the Tarquins to the Gracchi1—a period of more than three hundred
years—the disorders in Rome rarely brought banishment and still more
rarely brought bloodshed. On such slight grounds it is impossible to call
these disorders harmful, or to call a republic divided if in so long a span of
years her discords resulted in the banishment of no more than eight or ten
citizens and in the execution of a scant few. Not too many were even
sentenced to pay fines. Nor can a republic reasonably be deemed
disorganized where there are so many examples of virtue, for good
examples derive from sound training, sound training from sound laws; and

in this case the sound laws derived from the conflicts that many men have
unwisely condemned. Anyone properly examining the consequences of
these conflicts will find that they produced no banishments or acts of
violence detrimental to the common welfare, but they did produce laws and
institutions that promoted public liberty. Now, someone might say that such
proceedings were unusual and almost inhuman—to see the people assemble
and cry out against the Senate, the Senate cry out against the people, to see
the people storm through the streets, shops shut down, all the plebs march
out of Rome—things frightening even to read about. I say that all cities
must have devices by which the people can demonstrate their concern and
interest, especially those cities which intend to engage the people in
important undertakings. Among other devices Rome had these: when the
people wanted a law enacted they behaved as I have described or they
refused to enlist for the wars. Consequently, in order to placate them it was
necessary to satisfy their wishes in some way; and the wishes of free people
are seldom damaging to freedom, for they grow out of oppression or the
fear of being oppressed. When these fears are unjustified, there is recourse
in the public assemblies where some reputable man can rise and speak to
them and show them they are wrong. The people, as Cicero says, may be
ignorant, but they can recognize the truth and will readily yield when some
trustworthy man explains it to them.

The Roman government, therefore, ought to be censured more sparingly,

and it ought to be recognized that all the good things that came out of that
republic could have had none but the soundest of causes. If these discords
caused the establishment of the Tribunes, they deserve utmost praise; for
besides giving the people a share in the government, the Tribunes served as
the guardians of Roman liberty as will be shown in the next chapter
[omitted here].

to Be Censured

AMONG PRAISEWORTHY men, the most praiseworthy are leaders and
founders of religions; after them come founders of republics and kingdoms;
next most to be praised are those who, as commanders of armies, have
extended the boundaries of their kingdom or country. To these we add men
of letters and, since these are of various kinds, they are honored according
to their rank. To all other men, who are infinite in number, we assign some
measure of praise in the degree that they merit it through their occupation or
craft. Infamous and detestable, on the other hand, are the destroyers of
religion, the wreckers of kingdoms and republics, the enemies of virtue, of
learning, and of every other art that benefits and honors the human race.
Such are the irreligious, the violent, the ignorant, the useless, the slothful,
the cowardly. There will never be anyone so ignorant or so wise, so bad or
so good who, being asked to choose between the one kind of men and the
other, will not praise the praiseworthy and censure the blameworthy.
Nonetheless, nearly all men, deceived by a seeming good or a seeming
glory, willingly or unknowingly slip into the ranks of those who are more
deserving of blame than of praise; and being able to establish a kingdom or
a republic that would win them everlasting honor, they establish a tyranny
instead. They do not realize how much fame, how much glory, how much
honor, security, tranquillity, and satisfaction of mind they lose by this
choice, and how much infamy, shame, censure, danger, and affliction they
incur.

If they would read history and profit from the records of the past, it is

impossible that the private citizens of a republic would not rather be Scipios
than Caesars, or that anyone who through fortune or ability becomes a ruler
would not rather be an Agesilaus, a Timoleon, or a Dion than a Nabis, a

Phalaris, or a Dionysius,1 for they would see the latter roundly condemned
and the former highly applauded. They would also see that Timoleon and
those like him had no less authority in their native lands than Dionysius and
Phalaris had in theirs, and enjoyed far more security.

Now, let no one be deceived by Caesar's glory when they see him so

much praised by the historians, for those who praise him were corrupted by
his good fortune and were awed by the long duration of the Empire, which,
continuing to rule under his name, did not permit writers to speak openly
about him. But anyone who wishes to know what they would have said
about him if they had been free may judge by what they wrote about

Catiline;2 and in proportion as the one who commits an evil is more to be
censured than the one who merely plans to commit it, just so is Caesar the
more blameworthy of the two. One may also judge by the praise they
heaped upon Brutus; being unable to condemn Caesar because of his power,
they turned to praise his enemy instead.

Let anyone who has become the ruler of a republic also consider how

much more praise, after Rome had become an empire, was merited by those
emperors who lived by its laws, like good princes, than by those who lived
in the contrary fashion. He will observe that Titus, Nerva, Trajan, Hadrian,
Antoninus, and Marcus Aurelius did not need Praetorian guards or masses
of troops to protect them, because their own good behavior, the good will of
the people, and the love of the Senate protected them. He will also see that
the Western and Eastern armies were not enough to save Caligula, Nero,
Vitellius, and many other wretched emperors from the enemies which their
evil habits and their wicked lives had aroused. If the history of these men
were well considered, it would provide many lessons for a ruler and point
out to him the ways of glory and of shame, of security and of fear. Of
twenty-six emperors from Caesar to Maximinus, sixteen were assassinated
and ten died naturally. If among those who were assassinated some good
ones like Galba and Pertinax are to be numbered, their deaths must be
attributed to the corruption which their predecessors had introduced among
the soldiers; and if among those who died naturally some bad ones like
Severus are to be numbered, this must be attributed to their unusual good

fortune and ability—characteristics that few men combine. From these
lessons of history a ruler may also learn how a good kingdom can be
established, for he will observe that of the emperors who came to power by
inheritance all except Titus were bad, that of those who came to power by
adoption—like the five from Nerva to Marcus Aurelius—all were good, and
that when the Empire fell to heirs, it resumed the path to ruin.

Therefore, let a prince consider the period from Nerva to Marcus

Aurelius and compare it with the one preceding it and the one following it.
Then let him choose in which of these he would have preferred to live or in
which he would have preferred to rule. In the period ruled by good
emperors, he will see the ruler secure among secure citizens in a world of
peace and justice. He will see a Senate enjoying its authority, magistrates
enjoying their honors, wealthy citizens enjoying their wealth; he will see
nobility and virtue exalted, tranquillity and well-being everywhere, with all
rancors, all license, corruption, and ambition extinguished. He will see a
golden age in which every man can hold and defend any opinion he likes.
Finally, he will see the world in triumph: the prince revered and exalted, the
people loving and secure. If he will then duly examine the times of the other
emperors, he will see them wracked by savage wars, torn by seditions, by
cruelty in peace and war alike; he will see many princes perish by the
sword, many civil and foreign wars; he will see Italy afflicted by a host of
misfortunes, her cities sacked and ruined, Rome in ashes, her capitol
destroyed by her own citizens, her temples desolate, her rites corrupted, her
cities rampant with adulteries, her seas filled with exiles, her shores flooded
with blood; he will see innumerable cruelties committed in Rome, with
nobility, wealth, acquired honors, and, above all, virtue treated as capital
offenses; he will see slanderers rewarded, servants turned against their
lords, freedmen against their masters, and those lacking enemies oppressed
by their friends. Then he will recognize the debt that Rome, Italy, and the
world owes to Caesar.

Then, surely, if he is born of woman, he will be shocked at the thought of

imitating and reviving those wretched times, and he will be kindled with an
immense desire to emulate the good ones. Indeed, a prince seeking for glory
in the world should be glad to possess a corrupt city, not to ruin it

completely, as Caesar did, but to reform it, as Romulus did. Indeed, the
heavens can offer men no greater opportunity for glory, nor can men desire
a greater. Now, if a prince wishing to reform a city were thereby obliged to
abdicate and refused to do so out of a desire to retain his rank, he would
have some excuse. But if he were able to reform it and keep his rank, he
would have no excuse at all. In short, let those to whom the heavens grant
such an opportunity realize that two ways lie before them: one of them
assures them of security while living and of glory after death; the other
assures them of continual troubles while living and of eternal infamy after
death.

THOUGH ROME had its first founder in Romulus, to whom, as a daughter,
she owed her birth and training, nevertheless the heavens, judging that his
institutions would prove insufficient for so great an empire, inspired the
Senate to elect Numa Pompilius as his successor so that Numa could attend
to whatever Romulus had left undone. Finding a savage people and wishing
to reduce them to civil obedience through the arts of peace, Numa turned to
religion as a necessary instrument for the maintenance of a civil society, and
he constituted it in such a way that for many centuries there was nowhere so
much fear of God as in that republic. This facilitated whatever enterprise
the Senate or the great Roman leaders wished to embark upon. Anyone who
reviews the innumerable deeds of the Roman people collectively and those
of many individual Romans will observe how the citizens stood in far
greater fear of breaking an oath than of breaking a law, as though they had
more regard for God's might than for man's. This is manifestly
demonstrated in the actions of Scipio and of Manlius Torquatus. After
Hannibal had routed the Roman armies at Cannae, many citizens assembled
together and, fearing for their country, agreed to forsake Italy and go to
Sicily. Hearing of this, Scipio went to them and, sword in hand, made them
swear that they would not abandon their country. Lucius Manlius, father of
that Titus Manlius afterward called Torquatus, was indicted by Marcus
Pomponius, the Tribune of the people. Before the case came to trial, Titus
went to Marcus and, threatening to kill him if he did not swear to withdraw
the indictments against his father, induced him to swear to do so; and so
greatly did Marcus respect an oath that he withdrew the indictment. Thus
those citizens who could not be kept in Italy either by love of country or by
its laws were kept there by an oath they were forced to take; and thus a
Tribune overlooked his hatred for a father, the injury of a son, and the
claims of his own honor to obey his sworn oath. All this had no other origin
but the religion which Numa had introduced into the city.

Let those who study Roman history duly note how useful religion was in

directing the armies, in animating the people, in keeping men good, and in
shaming the wicked. Thus, if we were to dispute whether Rome owed a
greater obligation to Romulus or to Numa, I think the latter would take first
place; for where there is religion, it is easy to introduce military discipline,
but where there is military discipline and no religion, the latter can only be
introduced with difficulty. And it may be observed that Romulus did not
need the authority of God to establish the Senate and other civil and
military institutions, but it was indeed necessary for Numa, who pretended
to have conversations with a nymph from whom he received the counsels
he passed on to the people. This he did because he wanted to introduce new
and unaccustomed laws into the city and doubted that his own authority
would prove sufficient.

And in fact there was never anyone who ordained new and unusual laws

among a people without having recourse to God, for they would not
otherwise have been accepted. This is so because prudent men know of
many beneficial things which, having no persuasive evidence for them, they
cannot get others to accept. Consequently, wise men who wish to avoid this
difficulty resort to divine authority. Lycurgus, Solon, and many others who
had the same objectives in view did this. Marveling at Numa's wisdom and
goodness, the Roman people therefore yielded to all his proposals. It is true,
however, that because those were very religious times and because the
people with whom he had to deal were ignorant, he was greatly facilitated
in executing his designs and in impressing every new form upon them.
Doubtless anyone wishing to set up a republic at the present time would
find it easier to do so among mountaineers, where civilization is lacking,
than among those who are accustomed to the cities, where civilization is
corrupt. A sculptor will more easily extract a beautiful statue from a piece
of rough marble than from one that has been badly blocked out by someone
else.

Everything considered, then, I conclude that the religion which Numa

introduced into Rome was one of the primary causes of her prosperity, for
that was the source of good laws; good laws bring good fortune, and from
her good fortune ensued all the happy results of her enterprises. As the

observance of religious rites is the foundation of a republic's greatness, so
disrespect for them is the source of its ruin. Where a fear of God is lacking,
the state must either fail or be sustained by a fear of the ruler which may
substitute for the lack of religion. But since rulers live only a short while,
such a state must vanish as soon as the abilities that sustained it have
vanished. Hence it follows that states which rest solely upon a man's
abilities are of short duration and pass from the scene when his abilities are
no more; and it seldom happens that they are renewed in his successor. As
Dante wisely says:

Seldom does human probity ascend From branch to branch; and
this He wills, who gives it, That being sought from Him, it may
descend.1

Therefore, the welfare of a republic or kingdom does not lie in its having

a prince who governs it prudently while he lives, but rather in having one
who organizes it in such a way that it may endure after his death. And
though it is easier to persuade rude men to accept a new order or new
opinions, this does not mean that it is impossible to do the same with
cultivated men and with those who think they are not rude. The people of
Florence do not think they are ignorant or rude, yet Girolamo Savonarola
convinced them that he conversed with God.

I would rather withhold judgment as to whether this was true or not, for

one must speak respectfully of so great a man. But I will certainly say that
multitudes believed him without ever having seen anything extraordinary to
compel their believing it. His manner of life, his teachings, and the matters
he dealt with were enough to win their confidence. No one should therefore
fear that he cannot accomplish what others have accomplished, for, as I said
in the preface, men are born, live, and die in quite the same way as they
always have.

Church of Rome, Has Been Ruined

PRINCES AND republics concerned with keeping the state from corruption
must above all see to it that their religious ceremonies remain uncorrupted
and continue to be properly venerated, for every religion has its vital source
in some one of its principal institutions. Pagan religious life was based upon
the responses of the oracles and upon the order of soothsayers and diviners.
All the other ceremonies, sacrifices, and rites depended upon these, for the
people quite readily believed that the God who could predict their future
good or future evil could also bestow it. From this derived the temples, the
sacrifices, the supplications, and all the other rites of veneration. Hence the
oracles of Delos, the temple of Jupiter Ammon, and other celebrated oracles
that filled the world with wonder and devotion. When later the words of the
oracles began to reflect the will of the men in power and the people
recognized the deception, they lost faith and became capable of disrupting
all good civic order.

The rulers of republics or kingdoms must therefore seek to preserve the

principles of their religion. Having done this, they will find it an easy matter
to keep the state devout, obedient, and united. They should seek to favor
and strengthen every circumstance that tends to enhance religion, even if
they themselves judge it to be false. The wiser they are about natural reality,
the more they should do this. Because wise men adhered to this rule, faith
in miracles took root even among the false religions, for these wise ones
sought to promote them, whatever their source, and lent them their authority
so that they came to be believed by everyone. Of this sort of miracles there
were many in Rome. Among others, there was this one that took place

while the Roman soldiers were sacking the city of the Veii:1 A number of
them entered the temple of Juno and, having approached her image, they

said to it: “Do you wish to come to Rome?” Some of them thought she
nodded; others thought that she said, “Yes.” Because the soldiers were very
religious (as Titus Livy shows, for they had entered the temple without
making noise, devoutly and reverently), they became convinced that they
had heard the answer they had in a way expected. Camillus and the other
chiefs of the city entirely favored this opinion and belief and elaborated it.

If the rulers of Christian lands had kept religion true to the principles set

down by its founder, the states and republics of Christendom would be
more united and happier than they are. But there is no better evidence of its
decline than to see how the people who are closest to the Church of Rome,
the center of our religion, have the least faith. Anyone examining the
principles of our religion and observing how far present practice has strayed
from them would doubtless conclude that ruin or severe punishment is at
hand.

Because many believe that the well-being of the Italian cities derives

from the Church of Rome, I would like to present such arguments as occur
to me in opposition to this view, and I will propose two very potent ones
which, in my judgment, cannot be refuted. The first is that, because of the
bad examples set by the court of Rome, this land has lost all reverence and
religion, with the result that a host of troubles and disorders have followed;
for just as we may suppose every advantage to accompany religion, so may
we suppose the contrary to be the case where it is lacking. Our first debt to
the Church and her priests is that, thanks to them, we Italians have become
irreligious and wicked. But we owe it a still greater debt—the second cause
of our ruin: that is, that the Church has kept and still keeps this country
divided. Surely no country was ever happy or unified until it was all under
the rule of a single republic or a single prince, as is the case with France and
Spain. And the reason that Italy is not in the same situation and is not ruled
by a single republic or a single prince is the Church alone. Though located
in Italy and holding temporal power in it, she has had neither the strength
nor the ability to subjugate the Italian tyrants and become the ruler; on the
other hand, when threatened with the loss of her temporal dominions, she
has not been so weak as to be unable to bring in some foreign power to
defend her from any Italian lord who had become too strong. We know this

well from long experience, as when by means of Charlemagne she drove
out the Longobards who had become the rulers of nearly all of Italy, or
when in our own day she deprived the Venetians of power through the aid

of France. Later she drove the French out through the aid of the Swiss.2

Thus, having lacked the strength to conquer Italy, and having refused to let
others conquer her, the Church has seen to it that the country could not be
dominated by a single ruler but has had many princes and lords instead. The
result has been that she has become so weak and disunited as to become the
prey not merely of powerful barbarians but of anyone attacking her. We
Italians owe this to the Church, and to no one else. Anyone desiring positive
proof of this so as to see the truth more clearly should have the power of
relocating the court of Rome, with all the authority it now enjoys in Italy, in
the territories of the Swiss who, as regards religion and military discipline,
are the only people who live as the ancients did. Then in a short while he
would see the wicked habits of that court creating more disorder in those
lands than any other event could ever give rise to at any time.

Than a Prince

NOTHING IS more useless and more inconstant than the multitude. So says
our author Titus Livy, and so also do all other historians affirm. For in the
records of human actions we often find instances of a man's being
condemned to death by the multitude and then being bitterly mourned and
wished alive again by the same multitude, as the Roman people did in the
case of Manlius Capitolinus, whom they condemned and then longed to

have back again.1 Of this incident our author says, “In short, when he no
longer constituted a danger, the people were overcome with regret.”
Elsewhere, when he relates the events which took place in Syracuse after
the death of Hieronymus, grandson of Hiero, he says, “Such is the nature of

the multitude—either humbly to submit or haughtily to dominate.”2

Now, I do not know whether I take upon myself a task so hard and so full

of difficulties that I shall have to abandon it, or whether I shall be able to
carry it through with perseverance, since my object is to uphold a view that,
as I have said, all writers have opposed. Whatever the case, I do not believe
and never shall believe it wrong to defend any opinion with reason, without
recourse to authority or force.

I say, then, that this defect with which writers charge the multitude may

also be charged to individual men, and particularly to princes, for any man
who is not ruled by law would make the same mistakes as the unrestrained
multitude. This can easily be shown, for though there have been many
princes, there have been few who were wise and good. I am speaking of
rulers who were able to break the bonds that could have controlled their
actions. These do not include those kings who arose in Egypt in remote
antiquity when that country was governed by laws, nor do they include
those who arose in Sparta, nor those of present-day France, for that

kingdom is controlled by laws more fully than any other present kingdom
of which we have information. Such kings as come to hold power under a
constitution are not to be counted among those whose individual nature we
have to consider in order to discover whether it is like that of the multitude.
Otherwise we should have to compare kings regulated by law with a
multitude similarly regulated, and we would find the same virtues in both.
We would also find the multitude, as in the case of the Roman people,
neither haughtily dominant nor humbly submissive; for as long as the
Roman republic remained uncorrupted, the people did not serve humbly or
dominate arrogantly. On the contrary, they kept their places honorably with
their own laws and their own officials. And when it was necessary to rise up
against some powerful individual, they did so, as in the case of Manlius, of

the Decemvirs,3 and of others who sought to oppress them. And when it
was necessary to obey a dictator or the consuls for public good, they did so.
And if they mourned the dead Manlius Capitolinus, there is no cause for
surprise, since it was his virtues they mourned; and these were such that the
memory of them aroused compassion in everyone and they would have
been capable of producing the same effect in a prince, since all writers
agree that virtue is praised and admired even in one's enemies. But even if
all their mourning had been enough to return Manlius from the dead, the
Roman people would have passed the same judgment upon him, again
taking him from prison and again sentencing him to death. Nonetheless,
there have been princes reputed wise who put people to death and then
mourned their loss bitterly, as Alexander the Great mourned Clitus and

other friends, and as Herod mourned Mariamne.4 Yet what our historian
says about the nature of multitudes he does not apply to those that were
regulated by law, as the Roman people were, but to unrestrained multitudes
like those of Syracuse who committed the same mistakes that enraged men
commit, mistakes like those of Alexander and Herod which have already
been referred to. Therefore, the nature of multitudes is no more to be
blamed than the nature of princes, for all err equally when all can err
without distinction. As evidence of this, besides the examples already cited,
there are many to be found among the Roman emperors and among other
tyrants and rulers who displayed as much inconstancy and fickleness as was
ever seen in any multitude.

My conclusion, then, is contrary to the common opinion, which claims

that the people, when in power, are variable, unstable, and ungrateful; and I
affirm that these faults are no more common to them than to individual
princes. Now, if someone were to accuse people and princes together, he
could be right; but if he were to exclude princes, he would deceive himself;
for a populace that has power and is well regulated by laws will be as
stable, as prudent, and as grateful as a prince or, indeed, more so than a
reputedly wise prince. On the other hand, a prince who is not restrained by
laws will show more ingratitude and be more fickle and imprudent than the
people. Differences between the conduct of the multitude and the conduct
of princes do not derive from differences in their nature, that being the same
in both (though if there be some superiority either way, it will be found on
the side of the people); rather, they derive from differences in their respect
for the laws under which they live.

Those who study the Roman people will note that for four hundred years

they hated the name of king and loved the glory and common welfare of
their country, and they will note a host of examples testifying to both of
these attitudes. Now, if someone were to cite their ingratitude toward

Scipio,5 I would call attention to what I have already said at length about
this matter, where I demonstrate that the people show less ingratitude than
princes. As to prudence and stability, I say that the people are more prudent,
more stable, and more judicious than princes. And it is not without reason

that the voice of the people has been likened to the voice of God,6 for
popular opinion is amazingly reliable in its prognostications, so much so
that the people would seem to have hidden powers by which to foresee their
future ills and triumphs. As to judging things, if they hear two equally
skillful public speakers present opposing views, rarely will they fail to
choose the better argument or show an incapacity to fathom the truth of
what they hear. And if they err in matters involving courage or advantage,

as I said before,7 so too does a prince often err in matters involving his
passions, and these are more intense than those of the people. Again, in the
election of public officials we note that they make far better choices than
princes do. It is never possible to persuade the people to bestow authority
upon a man of disreputable and corrupt habits, while a prince can be so

persuaded in a thousand different ways. Moreover, when the people begin
to look upon a thing with horror, they will persevere in that attitude for
many centuries, but princes will not do so. On these last two points I shall
let the Roman people suffice as evidence. Through many centuries and in a
host of elections of consuls and Tribunes, they made no more than four
choices they had cause to regret; and, as I said, they so much despised the
name of king that no debt of obligation to any citizen was enough to save
him from merited punishment if he attempted to usurp that name. Then, too,
in cities where the people rule, we see extraordinary progress achieved in a
scant few years, far greater than any ever achieved under a prince, as
witness Rome after the expulsion of her kings, and Athens after her

liberation from Pisistratus.8 This cannot be the result of anything but the
fact that popular governments are superior to those of princes. And I will
not grant that all of what Livy has to say in the passage referred to or in any
other is sufficient to oppose my views, for if we compare all the disorders
chargeable to the people with all the disorders chargeable to princes, and all
the glorious achievements of the people with all those of princes, we will
find that in glory as in goodness the people are far superior. If princes are
indeed superior to the people in enacting laws, in organizing civil
governments, in setting up new statutes and ordinances, then doubtless the
people are so superior in maintaining what has been instituted that they
increase the glory of those who instituted them.

In short, to conclude this subject, I say that republics have endured for

many years just as princely states have, and both have needed to be
regulated by laws. A prince who is free to do as he pleases is unreasonable,
and a people that is free to do as it pleases is not wise. If we consider
princes restricted by laws and a people bound by laws, we will find greater
qualities in the people than in the princes. If we consider them both when
unrestrained by laws, we will find the people making fewer and less
weighty errors than princes, and possessing weightier remedies for them. A
corrupt and disorderly multitude can be spoken to by some worthy person
and can easily be brought around to the right way, but a bad prince cannot
be spoken to by anyone, and the only remedy for his case is cold steel.
From this we may conjecture as to which is susceptible to the graver illness;

for if words are enough to cure the people's illness and only steel will cure
that of a prince, no one will fail to conclude that a graver cure argues a
graver defect. When the people are without restraints, their follies need not
be feared, nor need there be so much apprehension about immediate ills as
about those that may ensue, for out of such confusion a tyrant may emerge.
But in the case of a bad prince the contrary is true, for it is immediate ills
that are to be feared, while the future will embody hope, and men will be
able to persuade themselves that the prince's bad conduct will clear the way
for liberty. Note the difference between these two. It is the same as the
difference between what is and what is yet to be. The cruelties of the
multitude are directed against those whom they fear will usurp their
common welfare; those of a prince are directed against those whom he fears
will usurp his own well-being. Opinions in dispraise of the people originate
in the fact that everyone can speak ill of them freely and without fear even
while they are the rulers. Of princes one can only speak on any occasion
with a host of fears and precautions.

Now, since my subject draws me to it, I do not think it would be

unsuitable to consider in the next chapter what sort of alliances are the most
trustworthy, whether those formed with republics or those made with

princes.9

2. The People the Romans Had to Fight, and How

Obstinately They Defended Their Freedom

TO THE difficulty the Romans encountered in overcoming neighboring
peoples and some far-off provinces, nothing contributed so much as the
love of liberty which the people of those times had. So obstinately did they
defend it that they could never have been subjugated except by unusual
prowess, for by many examples we know the dangers they faced to preserve
it or regain it. From the reading of history we also learn how harmful
servitude was to peoples and cities. And though in our own day there is

only one country that can be said to have free cities,1 in ancient times there
were many people enjoying abundant freedom in all countries. In Italy at
the time of which we are now speaking, we note that, beginning at the Alps
which separate Tuscany from Lombardy and going southward to the toe, all

the people were free. These included the Tuscans,2 the Romans, the
Samnites, and many others who occupied the region. Nor do we ever
encounter any mention of kings except for those who reigned in Rome and
except for the Tuscan Porsenna about whom history is silent regarding the
extinction of his line. But it is clear that when the Romans began their siege
of Veii the Tuscans were free. And so much did they enjoy their liberty, and
in fact hate the name of prince, that when the Veienti chose a king as their
defender against the Romans and sent to the Tuscans for aid, the latter, after
much deliberation, refused to send it for as long as the Veienti had a king,
because they judged it unwise to defend a nation that had already submitted
to someone.

It is easy to understand whence this love of liberty derives among people,

for experience shows that no city ever grew in dominion or wealth except
when it was free. And it is indeed a wonder to realize how great Athens

became within a century after it had thrown off the tyranny established by

Pisistratus.3 But it is even more extraordinary to note the greatness which
Rome attained after she was free of her kings. The reason is easy to
understand, for it is not the welfare of individuals but the common welfare
that makes cities great. And doubtless this common welfare cannot be
pursued except in republics because they undertake whatever action may be
needed to promote it. However harmful its pursuit may be to this or that
individual, those who stand to gain are so numerous that they can pursue it
in spite of the few who may be harmed.

The contrary is true where there is a prince. In such a case the things

which are of advantage to him more often than not are harmful to the city,
and the things which are of advantage to the city are harmful to him. Thus,
wherever tyranny replaces freedom, the least that can happen is that the city
will no longer increase in either power or wealth. Most often, indeed
always, it will decline. And if by chance a very capable tyrant appears by
whose courage and military skill the city's territories are increased, it will
not be a gain for the republic, but only for him, because he cannot advance
any of those good and valiant citizens over whom he tyrannizes, for they
will then become dangerous. Moreover, as to any lands he may conquer, he
cannot make them subject or tributary to the city of which he is lord, for he
gains no advantage by making it stronger. His advantage lies in keeping the
state disunited, each part of it directly subject to him. Thus he, and not his
city, profits from his conquests. Anyone who wishes to confirm this view
with a host of additional arguments may read Xenophon's treatise entitled

On Tyranny.4

It is no wonder then that the people of antiquity despised tyrants, loved

living in freedom, and exalted the name of liberty as they did when

Hieronymus, the grandson of Hiero of Syracuse, was slain in that city.5

When the news reached the army, which was stationed not far from
Syracuse, the soldiers became enraged and began to take up arms against
the slayers; but when they heard that the people were shouting liberty in
Syracuse, beguiled by that word, they became calm. It is also no wonder
that the people take extraordinary vengeance upon those who deprive them

of their freedom. Of this there have been many instances, of which I would
like to mention only one. It took place in the Greek city of Corcyra during

the Peloponnesian War.6 Greece was then divided into two parties, one
headed by the Athenians, the other by the Spartans, with the result that
many cities were internally divided, one faction favoring Sparta, the other
Athens. At that time the nobles of Corcyra rose up and deprived the people
of their liberty. Aided by the Athenians however, the people soon regained
the upper hand and, having seized all the nobles of the city, they locked
them up in a prison large enough to hold them all. From there, under
pretense of sending them off to various places of exile, they led them out
eight or ten at a time and, using many cruel torments, slew them. When
those who were still left in the prison became aware of this, they decided to
use every possible means to escape such an ignominious death and, having
armed themselves as best they could, they defended the prison entrance
against those who sought to enter. At this, the people, drawn to the scene by
the noise of fighting, tore down the upper sections of the building and
smothered the nobles beneath the ruins. Many other similarly amazing and
horrible events occurred in that land. So we see that a freedom that has been
lost is avenged with far more fury than one that has only been threatened.

Having wondered why people in those ancient times were fonder of

liberty than they are today, I have concluded that it is the same reason that
explains why men are now less courageous than they were then. I believe it
is to be explained by the difference between our education and theirs and by
the difference of religion upon which it is based. Our religion, having
shown us the truth and the true way, has caused us to have less esteem for
worldly honor, whereas the pagans, because they believed worldly honor to
be the highest good, showed greater fierceness in their actions. This is
demonstrated in many of their customs as compared to ours, beginning with
the splendor of their sacrifices and the humbleness of ours. There is more
gentleness than magnificence in some of ours, and nothing that is fierce or
vigorous. Their ceremonies lacked neither pomp nor magnificence, but they
added the extremely bloody and fierce act of sacrifice in which hordes of
animals were killed. This savage aspect of them tended to make the
participants savage too. Moreover, ancient religion exalted none but such

men as had attained great worldly glory, like commanders of armies and
rulers of republics.

Our religion has tended to glorify humble and contemplative men rather

than men of action. Moreover, it has claimed that the highest good lies in
humility, humbleness, and contempt of human things. Their religion
claimed that it lay in greatness of spirit, physical strength, and in all those
things tending to make men brave. If our religion demands courage of a
man, it demands it so that he may be able to suffer rather than do anything
bold. This way of life, then, seems to have made the world soft and given it
as prey to the wicked who can assuredly manage it, since the generality of
men, questing after paradise, thinks more of putting up with blows than of
avenging them. And though the world seems to have become effeminate
and heaven to have become disarmed, doubtless this is primarily due to the
baseness of men who have interpreted our religion according to the
promptings of indolence rather than the promptings of vigor. For if we
considered how it permits us to exalt and defend our country, we would
realize that it desires us to love it and honor it as well, and bids us prepare
ourselves to be such as can defend it.

This kind of education and these false interpretations explain why we no

longer see as many republics in the world as there were in ancient times,
and why people consequently do not have such love of liberty as they had
then, though I rather believe a greater cause to be that the Roman Empire
destroyed all the republics and free forms of civic life. Even though the
Empire later disintegrated, the cities were unable to reform and reorganize
their civic life except in a very few cases. But whatever the cause, in every
part of the world, whatever its size, the Romans found leagues of republics
fully armed and very determined in the defense of their freedom. This
shows that without rare and extreme valor the Roman people would have
been unable to overcome them.

As to particular instances that bear this out, I shall cite but one, that of the

Samnites, who, marvelous to relate,—and Titus Livy admits it—proved
themselves so powerful, so valiant in arms, that they were able to oppose
the Romans for a span of forty-six years, down to the time of the Consul

Papirius Cursor (son of the first Papirius) despite the routs, the destruction

of cities, and the massacres their land suffered.7 This is all the more
impressive when we see how that land which had held so many people and
cities is now almost uninhabited. At that time it was so well ordered, so
strong, that it would have proved unconquerable to all but Roman might
and valor.

It is easy to account for the prosperous civic life of that time and for the

lack of it now, for it all comes from the fact that they lived in freedom and
we live in servitude. As I said before, cities and states that enjoy full
freedom prosper greatly. They have larger populations because marriage is
easier there and more desirable; for men will willingly have children when
they believe they can provide for them, when they do not fear they will be
deprived of their patrimony, and when they recognize that their young will
not only grow up free men instead of slaves, but that, with ability, they may
also become leaders. In such states riches multiply abundantly, both those
produced by agriculture and those produced by industry, for everyone
willingly increases his property and goods if he believes that he will be
allowed to enjoy them. In such circumstances men compete with each other
in providing both private and public benefits, with the result that both
increase remarkably.

The contrary of all this is true for states that live in servitude, and the

harsher their servitude the more reduced is their prosperity. And of harsh
servitudes the harshest is to be in subjection to a republic. The first reason
for this is that it is the most enduring kind and offers no hope of release.
The second is that the aim of a republic is to enervate and weaken its
subject lands in order to increase its own prosperity. Such is not the aim of a
conquering prince unless he is a barbarian who destroys countries and lays
waste all the works of civilized man, as oriental princes do. But if he has
common human principles, he will most often have equal regard for all his
subject cities and will let them keep their industries and nearly all their
institutions. Thus, though they may not advance as free cities do, they will
not decline as enslaved ones do. I speak of those in subjection to a
foreigner, for I spoke earlier of those in subjection to a citizen.

Anyone considering all that has been said, then, will not be surprised at

the power of the Samnites when they were free and at their weakness after
they were subjugated. Titus Livy assures us of this in many places,
especially where he recounts the war with Hannibal. Here he tells us that
when the Samnites were being oppressed by a Roman legion stationed in
Nola, they sent emissaries to ask Hannibal for assistance. In their address
they explained that they had fought the Romans for a hundred years with
their own troops and their own commanders, that they had many times
resisted two consular armies and two consuls at the same time, and that now
they were reduced to such conditions that they could scarcely defend
themselves from a little Roman legion stationed in Nola.

21. How It Happened That Hannibal Gained the
Same Results in Italy As Scipio Did in Spain by

Contrary Means

I THINK that some people may be surprised when they see a certain
general, despite a contrary line of conduct, achieving the same results as

those who acted as I have just described.1 It may seem that victories do not
depend upon the methods that have been mentioned. Indeed, it may seem
that such methods bring neither more power nor better fortune, since fame
and glory may be attained by the very opposite methods. Now, so as not to
depart from the men I have been speaking of and so as to clarify the point I
wish to make, I say that Scipio, as we know, entered Spain and gained the
friendship of that province, the love and admiration of its people, by using
mercy and kindness. In contrast we saw Hannibal attain the same results in
Italy as Scipio did in Spain by using entirely opposite methods—that is,
cruelty, violence, rapine, and every sort of faithlessness, for all the cities of
Italy bolted to him and all the people obeyed him.

If we try to discover how this came about, we will find several reasons.

The first is that men—those who are well off as much as those who are not
—desire novelty. For, as was said before—and it is true—men grow weary
of good conditions and become dejected with bad ones. This desire, then,
opens the doors of a province to anyone introducing change. If he is a
foreigner, people will flock to him; if he is a native, they will surround him
and lend him support and favor so that, whatever his line of conduct, he will
have great success in such a place. Besides, men are moved by two
principal things—by love and by fear. Consequently, they are commanded
as well by someone who wins their affection as by someone who arouses
their fear. Indeed, in most instances the one who arouses their fear gains

more of a following and is more readily obeyed than the one who wins their
affection.

But so long as he has ability and so long as his ability is respected, it

matters little to a general whether he pursues one of these policies or the
other. For when the ability is great, as it was in the case of Hannibal and
Scipio, it cancels out all those errors which come about through winning too
much affection or arousing too much fear. But both of these methods can
produce difficulties capable of ruining a leader. For the person who desires
too much to be loved, any slight departure from the right course will bring
contempt, while for the person who desires too much to be feared, any
slight exceeding of due measure will bring hatred. Yet to hold a middle
course is impossible because our nature does not allow it. Therefore it is
necessary to compensate for excesses by exercising unusual ability, as
Hannibal and Scipio did. Nevertheless, we may note that both were harmed
by their conduct, yet both were successful.

Their success has already been dealt with. As to the harm in the case of

Scipio, it was that his soldiers, together with some of his allies, rebelled
against him. This could have had no other cause but his failure to arouse
fear, for men are so restless that, once a little door is provided for their
ambition, they quickly forget all the affection they had bestowed on their
leader because of his kindness, just as these soldiers and allies did. Thus, in
order to remedy the difficulty, Scipio was compelled to use some of the
cruelty he had shunned. As to Hannibal, there is no specific instance in
which his cruelty and faithlessness did him harm. But it may be supposed
that Naples and many other cities that remained loyal to the Romans did so
because of their fear of him. At any rate, it is certain that his impious
conduct made him more hateful to the Romans than any enemy their
republic had ever had before. Thus, though they had been willing to warn
Pyrrhus about the man who proposed to poison him even while he was with
his army in Italy, they never forgave Hannibal even after he was disarmed

and his troops were scattered, and they brought about his death.2 These
disadvantages accrued to Hannibal, then, because he was impious, faithless,
and cruel, but on the other hand they gave him a very great advantage
which all the writers have admired. It is that though his army was composed

of different races, no dissension ever arose to set them against each other or
against him. This could only have derived from the terror his person
aroused, which was so great that, combined with his renowned ability, it
sufficed to keep his soldiers quiet and united.

I conclude, therefore, that it does not much matter which method a

general adopts so long as he possesses great ability to go along with either
the one or the other; for, as I said before, both methods are defective and
dangerous unless corrected by exceptional skill. Now if Hannibal and
Scipio achieved the same results by opposite means—the one detestable,
the other praiseworthy, I do not think it amiss to speak of two Roman
citizens who attained equal glory by opposite but equally praiseworthy

means.3

Whether with Shame or Glory, by Whatever Means

Possible

AS I said above,1 the Consul and the Roman army were being besieged by
the Samnites, who had imposed very shameful conditions upon their
surrender (this involved passing under the yoke and returning disarmed to
Rome). The Consul was astonished at this and the army was in despair, but
Lucius Lentulus, the Roman legate, expressed it as his opinion that no
proposal by which their country could be saved should be rejected. Since
the survival of Rome depended upon the survival of that particular army, he
felt that it should be saved by whatever means possible, whether shameful
or glorious; for if the army were saved there would be time to erase the
shame, but if it were not saved, even if it perished gloriously, Rome and her
liberty would be lost. Consequently, his counsel was accepted.

This decision deserves to be noted and adopted by every citizen who may

be called upon to advise his country; for where the well-being of one's
country is at all in question, no consideration of justice or injustice, of
mercy or cruelty, of honor or shame must be allowed to enter in at all.
Indeed, every other consideration having been put aside, that course of
action alone which will save the life and liberty of the country ought to be
wholeheartedly pursued. The French have adopted this policy in both word
and deed to protect the majesty of their king and the might of their
kingdom, for they will hear no opinion with so much impatience as that
which describes a certain course of action as being disgraceful to the king.
They assert that their king is immune to shame in any action he undertakes,
whether successful or not; for, win or lose, they say, it is always a kingly
action.

CHRONOLOGY

1469  May 3. Machiavelli born in Florence.

1492  Lorenzo de' Medici (The Magnificent) dies.

      Alexander VI (Rodrigo Borgia) becomes Pope.

1494  Charles VIII of France invades Italy. Piero de' Medici is driven out

of Florence.

      Pisa becomes independent after nearly a century of subjection to

Florence.

      A new Florentine constitution is adopted, largely the work of

Savonarola.

      Battle of Fornovo (Il Taro); the French drive through an Italian army

and make good their escape from Italy.

1495  Florence begins efforts to regain Pisa.

1498  Savonarola is put to death by hanging, and his body is burned.

      Louis XII becomes King of France.

      Machiavelli is appointed Secretary to the Signoria.

1499  Louis XII invades Italy.

      Cesare Borgia begins the conquest of Romagna.

1500  Machiavelli's first mission to France.

1501  Cesare Borgia is named Duke of Romagna.

1502  Pier Soderini becomes Gonfalonier of Florence for life.

1503  Pope Alexander VI dies; Pius III succeeds him, then dies less than

a month later.

      Julius II (Giuliano della Rovere) becomes Pope.

1504  Machiavelli's second mission to France.

      Cesare Borgia surrenders Romagna to Julius II and is then sent to

Spain as a prisoner.

1506  Machiavelli begins work on establishing a citizen militia.

1507  Machiavelli is sent on a mission to Emperor Maximilian.

1508  Machiavelli is put in charge of operations against Pisa.

      The League of Cambray (Louis XII, Ferdinand of Aragon, Julius II,

Emperor Maximilian) is formed to attack Venice.

1509  Pisa surrenders to the Florentines.

      Battle of Vailá (Agnadello) results in defeat of Venice by the League

of Cambray.

1510  Machiavelli's third mission to France; returns and resumes work on

the militia.

1511  Machiavelli's fourth mission to France.

      The Holy League (Julius II, Venice, Ferdinand of Spain) is formed to

expel the French from Italy.

1512  Battle of Ravenna. The French are triumphant over the Holy

League, but are forced to withdraw from Italy at the approach of a Swiss
army in the pay of Pope Julius II. Spanish troops accompanied by the de'
Medici enter Florentine territory, demand the deposition of Soderini. When
the request is refused, they attack Prato, enter the city, and sack it. Two days
later Soderini resigns. Six weeks later Machiavelli is discharged from
office.

1513  Leo X (Giovanni de' Medici) becomes Pope.

      Machiavelli retires to his farm near San Casciano, works on The

Discourses and completes The Prince.

1515  Francis I becomes King of France.

1519  Leo X applies to Machiavelli for political advice.

1520  Machiavelli writes The Art of War and The Life of Castruccio.

      Begins his History of Florence under a commission from the officers

of the Studio pubblico.

1524  Machiavelli's play Mandragola is printed.

1526  Machiavelli employed by Clement VII to inspect the fortifications

of Florence.

1527  June 20. Machiavelli dies.

INTRODUCTION

*That is, when Machiavelli was arrested. 

Return to text.

**Battista Guicciardini was Governor of Prato when it was sacked. 

Return to text.

DEDICATION

  1.  Duke of Urbino and grandson of Lorenzo the Magnificent (1449—

1492). Originally, The Prince had been dedicated to Giuliano de'
Medici (Duke of Nemours and son of Lorenzo the Magnificent) who
died in 1516. 
Return to text.

 2.  An allusion to his unhappiness at being excluded from political office

and tacitly expressing the hope of being employed by the Medici party,
perhaps Machiavelli's chief motive in writing the present work. 
Return to text.

CHAPTER 1

 1.  Francesco Sforza (1401—1466), a soldier by profession, succeeded in

becoming Duke of Milan in 1450 through the aid of the Venetians. 
Return to text.

 2.  Ferdinand II (1452—1516), called the Catholic, added the Kingdom of

Naples to his possessions in 1501 and Sicily in 1504. 
Return to text.

  3.    “Fortune” is generally used by Machiavelli to mean the nature of

circumstances which, if favorable, are to be exploited for one's own
ends and, if unfavorable, are to be overcome or minimized by
appropriate action. It is not intended merely to imply luck and, whether
favorable or unfavorable, it is never an excuse for inaction.

“Ability” is generally used to translate Machiavelli's virtù. A key

word in The Prince and The Discourses, it implies physical and mental
capacity—intelligence, skill, courage, vigor—in short, all those
personal qualities that are needed for the attainment of one's own ends.
The term almost invariably carries no implication of virtue in the
moral sense. 
Return to text.

CHAPTER 2

 1.  Almost certainly a reference to The Discourses, which were put aside in

1513 to make way for the present work and were later resumed. 
Return to text.

 2.  Ercole d'Este I was defeated by the Venetians in 1482, but nearly all his

territories were restored to him in 1484. Pope Julius II (d. 1513) made
numerous attempts—all unsuccessful—to deprive Alfonso d'Este I of
Ferrara. 
Return to text.

 3.  Dentations: stones projecting from the surface of a wall for the support

of subsequent abutting structures. 
Return to text.

CHAPTER 3

 1.  Duke Ludovico il Moro was driven from Milan by the troops of Louis

XII in 1499. However, thanks to uprisings against the French within
the city and the aid of Swiss mercenaries, he was able to regain it early
in the following year. But he held it for barely a month when he was
again driven out by the French. 
Return to text.

  2.    Louis retained possession of Milan until 1512. In that year the

operations of the Holy League (Pope Julius II, Ferdinand the Catholic,
and the Venetians) forced him to withdraw his troops from the
peninsula. 
Return to text.

 3.  Mohamet II conquered Constantinople in 1453 and made it his capital. 

Return to text.

  4.    The Etolian League joined the Romans in opposing Philip V of

Macedon and the Achaean League in the First Macedonian War (215
—205 b.c.). 
Return to text.

 5.  The events somewhat loosely referred to here are as follows: in 197 b.c.,

the Romans defeated Philip V of Macedon at Cynocephalae and forced
him to surrender the Greek cities he had acquired after the First
Macedonian War. In 191, Antiochus III of Syria invaded Greece at the
invitation of the Etolians but was driven back into Asia Minor by the
Romans, who this time were supported by Philip V and the Achaean
League. In concluding peace, the Romans did not increase the power
of their recent allies; instead, they preferred to enlarge the Kingdom of

Pergamum as a counterweight to their future ambitions. 
Return to text.

 6.  Probably a reference to the policy of Pier Soderini, the leader of the

Florentine government during most of Machiavelli's political career. 
Return to text.

 7.  I.e., not of Charles VIII (who invaded Italy in 1494) but of Louis XII

(whose first expedition came five years later). 
Return to text.

  8.    Louis had hereditary claims on both the Duchy of Milan and the

Kingdom of Naples. For supporting him, the Venetians had been
promised Cremona and Ghiaradadda. 
Return to text.

 9.  His brief appearance in Italy had entirely disrupted the political balance

of the peninsula without bringing him any gains. 
Return to text.

10.  Though Romagna had long been divided into a number of independent

and semi-independent states, Pope Alexander VI claimed it as a
dominion of the Church and wished to establish his authority—or that
of his son Cesare Borgia—over it. To this end he entered into a secret
agreement with Louis in 1498, the chief terms of which were: (1) that
Cesare Borgia was to be made Duke of Valentinois; (2) that he was to
be provided with troops for the occupation of Romagna; (3) that Louis
was to be granted a divorce (from Jeanne of France, daughter of Louis
XI) so as to be free to marry Anne (widow of Charles VIII) and
acquire Brittany as her dowry; (4) that Louis's chief adviser, George
d'Amboise, was to become Cardinal of Rouen. 
Return to text.

11.    After the conquest of Milan in 1499, Louis withdrew from Italy,

leaving his viceroy in charge. He returned in 1502 to prepare for the
conquest of Naples (see Note 8 above). By that date Cesare Borgia had
become master of most of Romagna and was threatening intervention

in Tuscany, an action which Louis opposed, since the Florentines were
his allies. 
Return to text.

12.  By the terms of the Treaty of Granada (November, 1500), Louis had

agreed to partition the Kingdom of Naples with Ferdinand of Spain. 
Return to text.

13.  In fact, the joint French and Spanish venture into Naples did result in

conflict between them, and after the Battle of the Garigliano
(December, 1503), the Spanish became sole masters of Naples. 
Return to text.

14.  That is, he helped Cesare Borgia to extinguish the smaller powers of

Romagna; he thereby increased the power of the Church, which was
already strong; he allowed Ferdinand of Spain to become involved in
the affairs of Italy. 
Return to text.

15.  In joining the League of Cambray (1508), Louis allied himself with the

Pope (now Julius II), Ferdinand, the Emperor Maximilian, and others
in bringing about the defeat of Venice at the Battle of Vailá (May,
1509), by which Venice lost most of her mainland possessions. 
Return to text.

CHAPTER 4

  1.    Alexander invaded Asia Minor in 334 b.c., defeated Darius at

Gaugamela in 331, and reached India in 327. He died in 323, scarcely
eleven years after starting off on his expedition. 
Return to text.

 2.  Alexander's successors—his generals—began to fight over the spoils of

his empire soon after his death, and ultimately partitioned it among

themselves. 
Return to text.

 3.  Sanjaks: territories or provinces ruled by a governor appointed by the

sultan. 
Return to text.

 4.  Apparently Machiavelli is implying that the pre-Roman tribal chieftains

of Spain and Gaul (and later ones like Vercingetorix, who rebelled
against Caesar), as well as the hereditary rulers of some of the Greek
confederate states, had a political status similar to that of the feudal
French barons. 
Return to text.

 5.  Pyrrhus, King of Epirus, brought an army into Sicily in 278 b.c., but

met with little real success. Machiavelli attributes his failure to the fact
that the Greek city states of Sicily, unlike the Persian and Ottoman
empires, were not under direct absolute rule. 
Return to text.

CHAPTER 5

 1.  That is, to destroy its political and civil structure. 

Return to text.

 2.  At the end of the Peloponnesian War, Sparta required Athens to accept

an oligarchy composed of thirty pro-Spartan Athenians (the so-called
thirty tyrants). Democracy was restored, however, in the following
year. Sparta imposed a similar oligarchy upon Thebes in 382 b.c. This
was driven out three years later. 
Return to text.

 3.  The Romans destroyed Capua in 211 b.c., Carthage in 146, Numantia in

133. Thereafter they remained in Roman hands. 
Return to text.

  4.    Roman intervention in Greek affairs began during the Second Punic

War, in which Philip V of Macedon sided with Hannibal. It continued
sporadically through the four so-called Macedonian Wars (215—146
b.c.). The Romans frequently tried to establish aristocratic or
oligarchic governments in the Greek states, but with little lasting
success. Corinth was destroyed in 146 b.c. and her inhabitants were
sold into slavery. Thereafter Greece was a Roman province. See also
Chapter 3, Notes 4 and 5. 
Return to text.

 5.  Pisa became a Florentine possession in 1405 and remained so until 1494

(when Charles VIII of France invaded Italy). It was not reduced to
submission again until 1509. Machiavelli himself played an important
part in bringing this about. 
Return to text.

CHAPTER 6

 1.  See Chapter 1, Note 3 and Chapter 25. 

Return to text.

  2.    Cyrus: founder of the Persian Empire (558—529 b.c.); Romulus:

legendary founder of Rome; Theseus: legendary hero of Athens. This
intermingling of Biblical, legendary, and historical figures (all
accepted as genuinely historical by the author) does not in any way
weaken Machiavelli's point here if, as some commentators have done,
they are all taken to represent symbolic political types. 
Return to text.

 3.  Fra' (Friar) Girolamo Savonarola: a Dominican born in Ferrara, he was

sent to preach in Florence in 1492. His sermons, fiery and persuasive,
soon gained him a large following throughout the city. The descent of
Charles VIII into Italy (which it was believed he had prophesied) and
the establishment of the republican government after the expulsion of

Piero de' Medici (1494) brought him into political prominence. The
constitution then adopted was substantially his own work, and for a
few years thereafter little was done in the city without his consent. His
strenuous efforts to reform the city's morals aroused both enthusiasm
and animosity. But it was largely because of his outspoken criticism of
Pope Alexander VI that he was excommunicated and later imprisoned
and tortured. In 1498, after a trial for heresy conducted by two
Apostolic Commissioners sent from Rome, he was hanged and burned
in the Piazza della Signoria. 
Return to text.

 4.  Hiero II of Syracuse, publicly elected king after he had defeated the

Mamertines. Initially allied with Carthage in the First Punic War (264
—241 b.c.), he later became a staunch and faithful ally of the Romans.
See Chapter 13. 
Return to text.

 5.  Justin, Historiarum Philippicarum libri XLIV, XXIII, 4. 

Return to text.

CHAPTER 7

  1.    Darius I, King of Persia (521—485 b.c.), divided his kingdom into

twenty or more satrapies. 
Return to text.

 2.  The reference is to the Roman emperors (discussed at length in Chapter

19) who gained the purple by bribery or by outright purchase from the
Praetorian commanders. 
Return to text.

 3.  For Francesco Sforza, see Chapter 1, Note 1. For Cesare Borgia, see

Chapter 3, Notes 10 and 11. As will be seen from what follows, Cesare
Borgia was the very type of the new prince whom Machiavelli had in
mind. The events described—some of which the author himself

witnessed—cover a span of less than five years, 1498—1503. 
Return to text.

  4.    I.e., the simultaneous illness of his father and himself. See Note 16

below. 
Return to text.

 5.  In Romagna the two small states of Forlì and Pesaro were under the

protection of Ludovico il Moro (son of Francesco Sforza), while
Faenza and Rimini were under the protection of Venice. 
Return to text.

 6.  The very numerous Orsini and Colonna families had been prominent in

Roman affairs for centuries. Usually the leaders of rival factions, in
possession of extensive land holdings and numerous fortresses in and
around Rome, they constituted an almost perpetual threat to papal
authority and were therefore the Pope's traditional enemies. Like many
other Italian barons or princelings of the time, they were often captains
of mercenary armies. 
Return to text.

 7.  See Chapter 3, Notes 8 and 10. Louis's marriage to Anne of Brittany

also gave him title to the Duchy of Milan. 
Return to text.

 8.  Borgia was created Duke of Romagna in 1501. 

Return to text.

 9.  Paolo Orsini was reluctant to support the attack on Bologna for fear that

Borgia's power, if sufficient, would ultimately be the undoing of the
captains he was now dependent upon. 
Return to text.

10.  Louis sent troops to the defense of Florence. 

Return to text.

11.    In October, 1502, Borgia's hired captains met at La Magione and

formed a conspiracy to frustrate his further ambitions. They agreed to
keep possession of territories they had conquered in his name, to
encourage rebellion in other Borgia territories, to form an army for
their common defense, and to seek allies. The revolt of Urbino and the
disorders of Romagna were the immediate result. Borgia countered by
obtaining more French troops, and this forced the conspirators to make
peace overtures. The conditions Borgia offered were deceptively
generous. The conspirators agreed to restore all lost territories and to
continue in his service. 
Return to text.

12.  In December, 1502, Borgia suddenly dismissed his French troops. 

Return to text.

13.    Believing that they had become entirely reconciled with Borgia, the

former conspirators proceeded to fulfill their agreement and then
joined him in Senigallia. There Borgia had them seized. Two of the
captains (Vitellozzo Vitelli and Oliverotto da Fermo) were strangled
immediately. Two others (the Duke of Gravina and Paolo Orsini) met
the same fate a few weeks later. 
Return to text.

14.  See Note 10 above. 

Return to text.

15.    See Chapter 3, Notes 12 and 13. The French had recently suffered

serious reverses and were facing defeat. Alexander and his son were
therefore planning to abandon them and join the Spaniards. 
Return to text.

16.  On August 5, 1503, following a dinner at the residence of a cardinal,

the Pope and his son became seriously ill. Less than two weeks later
the Pope was dead, and Cesare did not recover until September.
Meanwhile the College of Cardinals was meeting in conclave to elect a
new pope, a French army was advancing south to the relief of Gaeta,

and the Spanish forces to the south were assembling to meet it. 
Return to text.

17.  Survivors and relatives of the conspirators of La Magione. See Note 11

above. 
Return to text.

18.  Pius III succeeded Alexander VI but survived only a month, and was in

turn succeeded (November 1, 1503) by Giuliano della Rovere, who
took the name Julius II. 
Return to text.

19.  Some of the motives these men had for opposing Cesare Borgia may be

deduced from the following facts: Giuliano della Rovere had been one
of Alexander's chief rivals for the tiara in 1492. Later Cesare had
expelled his brother from the lordship of Senigallia. Raffaello Riario
was related to both Giuliano della Rovere and Caterina Sforza of Forlì,
whom Cesare had also deposed. Ascanio Sforza was the brother of
Ludovico il Moro, who had been driven from Milan by Cesare's ally,
Louis XII. For Giovanni Colonna, see Note 6 above. 
Return to text.

CHAPTER 8

  1.    In Chapter 6 Machiavelli deals with examples of men who became

rulers by means of their ability; in Chapter 7 he deals with those who
became rulers by means of the fortunes of others. Here and in Chapter
9, he deals with the two remaining methods of becoming a ruler, which
are briefly defined in this paragraph. 
Return to text.

 2.  Agathocles was King of Syracuse from 317 to 289 b.c. For a time he

ruled nearly all of Sicily. 
Return to text.

 3.  See Chapter 7, Notes 11 and 13. 

Return to text.

CHAPTER 9

  1.    Or more precisely, monarchy, democracy, or anarchy. See The

Discourses One, II. 
Return to text.

 2.  Nabis was tyrant of Sparta between 207 and 192 b.c. He proposed a

redistribution of land in order to gain popular favor. 
Return to text.

 3.  The Gracchi, Tiberius and Caius, Tribunes of the people in 133 and 123

b.c., respectively, introduced agrarian reforms in the interests of the
lower classes and fell victims to the wrath of the Senate. 
Return to text.

Giorgio Scali, one of the leaders of the Plebeian party, lost the favor

of the people through his insolence, and was beheaded in 1382, after
attempting to rescue a friend from prison by force.

CHAPTER 10

 1.  Treated in Chapter 6, developed further in Chapters 12 and 13. 

Return to text.

  2.    Most of the cities and states of Germany were nominally under the

authority of the Holy Roman Emperor (Maximilian, 1493—1519). But
in Machiavelli's day—and even long before—the emperor's power was
insufficient to make good his lawful claims. 
Return to text.

CHAPTER 11

  1.    The French monarch referred to is Louis XII, who was forced to

withdraw from Italy in 1512 after the Battle of Ravenna as a
consequence of the actions of the Holy League led by Pope Julius II
(1503—1513). The reference to the Venetians relates to events that had
occurred earlier—the successful operations of the League of Cambray
by which Julius had managed to use the French to subdue the
Venetians in 1509. See Chapter 3, Notes 2 and 15. 
Return to text.

 2.  That is, before 1494. 

Return to text.

 3.  Venice sought to add Ferrara to its dominions in 1482. After some initial

successes, it was forced to disgorge its gains when a league (chiefly
Florence, Naples, Milan) was organized to oppose its expansion. 
Return to text.

 4.  See Chapter 7, Note 6. 

Return to text.

 5.  Pope Sixtus IV (1471—1484), uncle of Pope Julius II, had been very

vigorous in promoting the temporal interests of the Church and of his
family. 
Return to text.

 6.  For the French invasion of 1499 and the exploits of Duke Valentino

(Cesare Borgia), see Chapter 7 and notes. 
Return to text.

 7.  That is, chiefly by the sale of ecclesiastical offices. 

Return to text.

 8.  The major aims of Pope Julius II were: the territorial aggrandizement of

the Church (hence the conquest of Bologna in 1506 and the defeat of
the Venetians in 1509), and the expulsion of the French from Italian
soil (hence the formation of the Holy League referred to in Note 1
above). 
Return to text.

 9.  Pope Leo X (1513—1521), uncle of Lorenzo de' Medici, to whom The

Prince was dedicated. These lines were written shortly after the Pope's
election. 
Return to text.

CHAPTER 12

 1.  The same judgment is expressed in The Discourses One, IV. 

Return to text.

 2.  Auxiliaries: troops borrowed from an ally. 

Return to text.

  3.    When Charles VIII met only the scantiest resistance in 1494, Pope

Alexander VI was led to say that the French had come with chalk in
their hands to mark their lodgings. 
Return to text.

 4.  The remark was attributed to Savonarola. See Chapter 6, Note 3. 

Return to text.

 5.  At the end of the First Punic War (241 b.c.), the Carthaginian troops just

returned from Sicily mutinied for their pay and were joined by some of
the oppressed African subjects. They were not finally put down until
237, after an enormous struggle. 
Return to text.

 6.  Actually Epaminondas died in 362 b.c. Philip did not become King of

Macedonia until 359, and did not occupy Thebes until 338. 
Return to text.

 7.  Filippo Visconti (1412—1447): Francesco Sforza's father-in-law (see

Chapter 1, Note 1). The Battle of Caravaggio took place in 1448. 
Return to text.

 8.  Muzio Attendolo Sforza, Francesco's father, deserted Giovanna in 1426

and took service with Louis III of Anjou, her rival for the throne of
Naples. 
Return to text.

 9.  Giovanni Aucut, or Sir John Hawkwood, an Englishman, captain of the

White Company hired by Pisa in 1363 and by Florence in 1375. He
remained in the service of Florence until his death in 1394. 
Return to text.

10.  Followers of Braccio da Montone (d. 1434), a condottiere, or captain of

a mercenary army, like the others named here. He occupied Rome in
1417 and was driven out by Muzio Attendolo Sforza. 
Return to text.

11.  Paolo Vitelli (brother of Vitellozzo Vitelli; see Chapter 7, Note 13), was

hired by Florence in 1498 in her struggle to regain possession of Pisa.
Suspected of treason, he was executed the following year. 
Return to text.

12.  Venetian efforts to expand on the Italian mainland began in 1339 with

the occupation of Treviso. 
Return to text.

13.    Francesco Bussone, Count of Carmagnuola, another condottiere.

Initially successful in his operations against Milan, his inaction in the
campaign of 1432 aroused the suspicions of the Venetians, and he was
executed soon after. 
Return to text.

14.    At the Battle of Vailá (or Agnadello) in 1509, part of the Venetian

forces were commanded by Niccolò Orsini, Count of Pitigliano. See
Chapter 3, Note 15. 
Return to text.

15.  The facts alluded to here refer chiefly to the period between the death

of the Emperor Frederick II (1250) and the second invasion of the
Emperor Charles IV (1368). During this period the leading factions of
the numerous Italian city states were partisans in the dominant conflict
of the era—the conflict between pope and emperor for temporal
supremacy. The Guelf faction was usually on the side of the pope,
while the Ghibelline faction was usually on the side of the emperor. In
most instances the republics (or communes) were Guelf. But long after
the conflict between pope and emperor had actually ended, Guelfs and
Ghibellines continued to play a part in Italian politics. 
Return to text.

16.  Alberigo da Conio (d. 1409), founder of the Company of St. George, a

mercenary army. 
Return to text.

17.  That is, Charles VIII, Louis XII, Ferdinand the Catholic, and the Swiss

mercenary armies frequently engaged in Italian campaigns. 
Return to text.

CHAPTER 13

  1.    The reference is to the formation of the Holy League in 1511. See

Chapter 3, Note 2. 
Return to text.

 2.  Immediately following the rout of the Holy League at Ravenna in 1512,

twenty thousand Swiss troops, hired by the Pope, entered Italy and
drove the victors back into France. 
Return to text.

 3.  The troops, largely Gascons and Swiss hired by Louis XII, mutinied

shortly after beginning the assault on Pisa. 
Return to text.

 4.  Emperor John Cantacuzene summoned the Turks in 1353 to help in his

dynastic struggles with the Paleologi. When the struggle ended two
years later, the Turks stayed on. 
Return to text.

 5.  Already discussed in Chapter 7. 

Return to text.

 6.  See Chapter 6, Note 4. 

Return to text.

 7.  I Sam. 17:39. 

Return to text.

 8.  Charles VII (1422—1461) organized the Franc Archers (i.e., infantry) in

1448, successfully ended the Hundred Years' War in 1453, leaving
only Calais in English hands. 
Return to text.

  9.    Louis XI (1461—1483) obtained treaty rights to recruit troops in

Switzerland in 1474. 
Return to text.

10.  See Chapter 3, page 18. 

Return to text.

11.  Under Valens, Emperor of the East, in a.d. 376. 

Return to text.

12.  “. . . that nothing is so weak and unstable as a reputation for power

which is not based on one's own strength.” Tacitus, Annals XIII, 19. 
Return to text.

13.  That is, Cesare Borgia, Hiero of Syracuse, David, and Charles VII of

France. 
Return to text.

CHAPTER 14

 1.  See Chapter 1, Note 1. Actually the reference should be to Francesco's

descendants: Galeazzo Maria, murdered in 1476; Gian Galeazzo,
deposed by his uncle Ludovico il Moro; Ludovico il Moro, deposed in
1500 (see Chapter 3, Note 1). Maximilian, deposed in 1515, may also
be included. 
Return to text.

  2.    Philopoemen (253—183 b.c.), repeatedly elected general of the

Achaean League; Plutarch called him “the last of the Greeks.” 
Return to text.

CHAPTER 15

 1.  See the concluding paragraph in The Discourses Three, XLI. 

Return to text.

CHAPTER 16

 1.  Pope Julius II is said to have made many lavish promises to win election

and later sold many ecclesiastical offices in order to fulfill them. 
Return to text.

  2.    The rulers referred to are, of course, Louis XII and Ferdinand the

Catholic. 
Return to text.

CHAPTER 17

  1.    At Pistoia in 1501 and 1502 a long smoldering rivalry between two

factions, which had been encouraged by the Florentines in order to
gain control of the city, broke out into rioting. The Florentine
government then sent Machiavelli to settle the difficulties. At first,
efforts were made to pacify the leaders of the opposing factions. When
these failed, the leaders were banished from the city, but only after
much bloodshed. Machiavelli had favored banishing them or executing
them at the very outset. 
Return to text.

 2.  “Sore need and my new reign compel these/Deeds, to guard my borders

on all sides.” Aeneid I, 563—64. 
Return to text.

 3.  For a detailed discussion of the conduct of Hannibal and Scipio, see The

Discourses Three, XXI. 
Return to text.

 4.  Fabius Maximus: Roman Consul and dictator, called “the Delayer” for

his fight-and-run tactics against Hannibal after the Battle of Lake
Trasimene (217 b.c.). Later he opposed Scipio's aggressive policy. 
Return to text.

CHAPTER 18

  1.    The ideas expressed in this chapter, perhaps the most repugnant to

Machiavelli's detractors, should be compared with those expressed in
The Discourses One, X. 
Return to text.

  2.    Machiavelli's friend, the historian Guicciardini, wrote that it had

become proverbial in Rome to say that Pope Alexander never did what
he said he would do, while his son Cesare never said what he did. 
Return to text.

 3.  For a contrasting judgment, see The Discourses One, LVIII. 

Return to text.

 4.  The unnamed ruler is Ferdinand the Catholic (1479—1516). 

Return to text.

CHAPTER 19

 1.  For Nabis, see Chapter 9, Note 2. 

Return to text.

 2.  In 1445. 

Return to text.

 3.  The Parliament of Paris, founded in the reign of Louis IX (ca. 1254),

was the high court of justice. 
Return to text.

 4.  These ten emperors ruled in succession from a.d. 161 to 238. 

Return to text.

  5.    Marcus Aurelius (161—180), author of the Meditations, was the

adopted son of Antoninus Pius, whom he succeeded to the purple. He
died while directing the war against the Marcomanni in Pannonia (now
Austria).

Pertinax (193) was selected to replace Commodus by the

conspirators who had arranged the latter's murder, and the choice was
afterward confirmed by the Senate. He was assassinated three months
later by the Praetorians, who feared his reforms.

Alexander Severus (222—235) succeeded Elagabalus, by whom he

had been adopted. For a time the celebrated jurist Ulpian and the
historian Dion Cassius were his advisers. Prudent and moderate
himself, he was influenced by the less admirable character of his
mother, Mamaea. He was slain by a group of mutinous soldiers, who
may have been encouraged to the act by his successor, Maximinus. 
Return to text.

 6.  See Note 14 below. 

Return to text.

 7.  Septimius Severus (193—211): commander of the army in Pannonia, he

was proclaimed emperor by his troops after the death of Pertinax,
spent most of his reign in army camps, and died in York, England. 
Return to text.

  8.    Didius Julianus (193), a senator, purchased the empire from the

Praetorian guards by outbidding his rival Sulpicianus. He ruled only
sixty-six days. 
Return to text.

 9.  Pescennius Niger (d. 194): commander of the Eastern armies, he was,

like Septimius Severus, proclaimed emperor by his troops after the
death of Pertinax. 
Return to text.

10.  Clodius Albinus (d. 197): governor of Britain and commander of the

Western armies, apparently remained neutral until challenged by
Septimius Severus, who defeated and killed him near Lyon. 
Return to text.

11.  Caracalla (211—217): succeeded to the throne along with his brother

Geta, whom he soon after murdered. Gibbon labeled him “the common
enemy of mankind.” 
Return to text.

12.  Following Geta's murder, some twenty thousand Romans, believed to

be his friends or adherents, were put to death by Caracalla. Later, while
visiting Alexandria, he ordered a general massacre of the population. 
Return to text.

13.  The centurion had been incited to the crime by Macrinus. See Note 16

below. 
Return to text.

14.  Commodus (180—192): the self-styled “Roman Hercules,” was given

poison by his favorite concubine and then strangled. 
Return to text.

15.  Maximinus (235—238) never visited Italy during his reign. 

Return to text.

16.  Elagabalus (218—222): elevated to the purple by the intrigues of his

grandmother, who claimed he was the son of Caracalla, and by the
army at Emesa in Syria, he succeeded Macrinus (217—218) after the
latter's defeat and assassination. For Julianus, see Note 8 above. 
Return to text.

17.  The reference is to the Mamelukes (i.e., white slaves) who formed the

sultan's guard and, in that position, acquired the power to select his
successor (1250—1517). 
Return to text.

CHAPTER 20

 1.  On Pistoia, see Chapter 17, Note 1. 

Return to text.

 2.  A “condition of balance” existed between 1469 and 1492, the period

during which Lorenzo de' Medici, its chief architect, was ruler of

Florence. 
Return to text.

 3.  See Chapter 12, Note 15. 

Return to text.

 4.  See Chapter 3, Note 15. 

Return to text.

 5.  Pandolfo Petrucci, one of the craftiest despots of his day, managed the

affairs of Siena from 1500 to 1512. Implacable in his opposition to
Cesare Borgia, he was believed to be the brains behind the conspiracy
at La Magione. See Chapter 7, Note 11. 
Return to text.

 6.  Niccolò Vitelli, a condottiere, was driven from Cittá di Castello by the

troops of Pope Sixtus IV in 1474 and returned to it following the
pontiff's death in 1482. It was then that he dismantled the fortresses. 
Return to text.

 7.  Guidobaldo da Montefeltro, Duke of Urbino, was driven from his duchy

by Cesare Borgia in June, 1502. Restored by the conspirators of La
Magione (see Chapter 7, Note 11) in October of the same year, he was
forced to flee again a month later. Before doing so, he ordered the
dismantling of his fortresses. He returned again in 1503 after Borgia's
fall from power. 
Return to text.

 8.  Long the rulers of Bologna, the Bentivolgi were expelled by Pope Julius

II in 1506. Supported by the French, they returned in 1511 and ordered
the destruction of fortifications that had been erected by the Pope. 
Return to text.

  9.    For Francesco Sforza, see Chapter 1, Note 1. Reliance on the castle

tended to make the Sforzas indifferent to their subjects. 
Return to text.

10.    The event occurred in 1488. The Countess Caterina Sforza was the

niece of Ludovico il Moro of Milan. 
Return to text.

CHAPTER 21

  1.    The two chief steps by which Ferdinand achieved the unification of

Spain were: (1) his marriage to Isabella, by which Castile and Aragon
became one kingdom (1479); (2) the conquest of Granada, by which
the Moors were finally driven from Spain (1492). 
Return to text.

  2.    The Marranos: Moslems and Jews forcibly baptized. They were

expelled in 1501—2. 
Return to text.

 3.  Ferdinand occupied the African coast from Oran to Tripoli in 1509; his

military involvement in Italy began in 1501, with the publication of the
Treaty of Granada (see Chapter 3, Note 12); his war on France began
in 1512 when he joined the Holy League (see Chapter 3, Note 2). 
Return to text.

  4.    Bernabò Visconti, Lord of Milan (1354—1385), was noted for his

bizarre actions, his passion for hounds—he kept as many as 5,000 of
them—and his cruelty. 
Return to text.

 5.  For the events related here, see Chapter 3, Note 5. The quoted passage

is from Livy XXXV, 48. 
Return to text.

 6.  See Chapter 3, Notes 8 and 15. 

Return to text.

 7.  In the war between France and the Holy League (see Chapter 3, Note 2),

Florence had remained neutral. As a result, when the Holy League
triumphed in 1512, it turned upon Florence, brought about the fall of
its republican government (in which Machiavelli had been active) and
the restoration of the Medici family. 
Return to text.

CHAPTER 22

  1.    Antonio da Venafro: professor of law at Siena, he later became the

highly esteemed minister of Pandolfo Petrucci (see Chapter 20, Note
5). 
Return to text.

CHAPTER 23

  1.    Pre' Luca (i.e., Luca the priest) Rinaldi: ambassador of Emperor

Maximilian (1493—1519). 
Return to text.

CHAPTER 24

 1.  Frederick of Aragon, expelled from Naples in 1501 through the joint

operations of the French and Spanish. 
Return to text.

 2.  In Chapters 13 and 14. 

Return to text.

 3.  Philip V of Macedon (221—179 b.c.). See Chapter 3, Note 5. 

Return to text.

CHAPTER 25

 1.  That is, in 1506. 

Return to text.

CHAPTER 26

 1.  See Chapter 6, Note 2. 

Return to text.

 2.  Doubtless the allusion is to Cesare Borgia. See Chapter 7. 

Return to text.

 3.  See Chapter 11, Note 9. 

Return to text.

 4.  “. . . for a necessary war is a just war and arms are holy where there is

no hope except in arms.” Livy IX, 1. 
Return to text.

 5.  Events mentioned in Exodus 14—17, here associated with the recent

triumphs of the Medici family. 
Return to text.

 6.  The Taro, on the banks of which the Battle of Fornovo was fought in

1495. Here the French army broke through the ranks of the Italian
troops and made good its escape from the peninsula. Alessandria,
Capua: sacked by the French in 1499 and 1501 respectively. Genoa:
after the overthrow of its aristocratic government by the common
people in 1506, the city was forced to capitulate to the French in the
following year. Vailá: see Chapter 3, Note 15. Bologna: the papal
legate in charge of its defense in 1511 abandoned it to the approaching
French forces. Mestre: burned by the Spanish troops of the Holy

League in 1513. 
Return to text.

 7.  Battle of Ravenna, April, 1511. The Germans were serving with the

French, the Spaniards with the Holy League, which was defeated. 
Return to text.

 8.  Petrarch, “Italia Mia,” lines 93—96. 

Return to text.

BOOK ONE, 2

 1.  Lycurgus, the legendary Spartan lawgiver believed to have lived in the

ninth or eighth century b.c. 
Return to text.

 2.  In 1502, after a revolt in Arezzo had been suppressed, the Florentine

constitution was changed to provide for a gonfaloniere, or chief
officer, who was to keep his post for life. After the sack of Prato in
1512, the republic was overthrown in all but name and the Medici
family returned to power. 
Return to text.

 3.  Solon came to power in 594 b.c. Except for two periods, during which

he was exiled, Pisistratus was tyrant of Athens from 560 to 527 b.c.,
when he died. He was succeeded by his sons, who remained in power
until about 510. 
Return to text.

 4.  The date of the first tribunate is uncertain. Both 494 and 471 b.c. have

some authority. 
Return to text.

BOOK ONE, 3

 1.  The traditional date is 509 b.c. 

Return to text.

BOOK ONE, 4

 1.  That is, from about 509 to 133 b.c. See The Prince, Chapter 9, Note 3. 

Return to text.

BOOK ONE, 10

 1.  Agesilaus was King of Sparta (398—360 b.c.) and one of its most able

and patriotic generals. Timoleon (410—337 b.c.) slew his brother to
prevent his setting up a tyranny in Corinth. Later summoned to Sicily,
he defeated the Carthaginians and established democracies in the
Greek cities of the island. Dion, a friend of Plato, expelled Dionysius
the Younger from Syracuse. Nabis, tyrant of Sparta (207—192 b.c.),
was famed for his cruelty. Phalaris, tyrant of Agrigentum (570—554
b.c.), was also famed for his cruelty. Dionysius the Elder (405—367
b.c.) and the Younger (367—356 b.c.) were both tyrants of Syracuse. 
Return to text.

 2.  Catiline plotted to overthrow the Roman government by force in 63 b.c.

during the consulship of Cicero, who obtained evidence of his designs
and denounced him before the Senate. He was slain in battle the
following year. Few men have been so frequently or so violently
condemned as Catiline. 
Return to text.

BOOK ONE, 11

 1.  Purgatory, VII, 121—23. 

Return to text.

 2.  See The Prince, Chapter 6, Note 3. 

Return to text.

BOOK ONE, 12

 1.  In 396 b.c. 

Return to text.

 2.  Charlemagne captured Pavia, the capital of the Longobard (or Lombard)

kingdom in 773. The League of Cambray defeated the Venetians in
1509 (see The Prince, Chapter 3, Note 15). The Holy League drove the
French out of Italy in 1512 (see The Prince, Chapter 11, Note 1). The
chief architect of both leagues was Pope Julius II. 
Return to text.

BOOK ONE, 58

 1.  Manlius Capitolinus saved the Capitol from capture by the Gauls in 390

b.c. Hence his name. Later charged with treason, he was condemned to
death by the people and was hurled from the Tarpeian rock. 
Return to text.

 2.  Hieronymus was slain by the people of Syracuse in 215 or 214 b.c. after

a reign of little more than a year. 
Return to text.

 3.  The Decemvirs: ten magistrates elected from the Senate in 441 b.c. to

codify the Roman laws. Given absolute power, they soon began to act

tyrannously and were removed. 
Return to text.

 4.  Clitus saved Alexander's life in the Battle of Granicus (334 b.c.), and

was later slain by him in a fit of temper during a banquet. Afterward
Alexander bewailed his rashness. Mariamne, the wife of Herod the
Great, having been falsely accused of adultery, was put to death in 29
b.c. Herod later repented. 
Return to text.

  5.    Scipio Africanus, the hero of Zama (202 b.c.), was charged with

accepting bribes in 185. 
Return to text.

 6.  The well-known vox populi, vox Dei. 

Return to text.

 7.  In The Discourses One, 53, Machiavelli argues that it is difficult to get

the people's consent for a policy which appears to involve loss or
cowardice, even though it actually involves neither. As an illustration,
he cites the case of Fabius Maximus (“the Delayer”) whose policy of
avoiding a head-on encounter with Hannibal (after 217) was mistaken
for cowardice. 
Return to text.

 8.  See The Discourses One, 2, Note 3. 

Return to text.

 9.  In The Discourses One, 59, Machiavelli asserts that both republican and

princely states are prone to break alliances whenever their own
survival would be seriously endangered if they honored them. In cases
where their survival would not be seriously endangered, however,
republics are more inclined to honor their pledges than are princely
states. 
Return to text.

BOOK TWO, 2

 1.  That is, Germany. 

Return to text.

 2.  I.e., the Etruscans. 

Return to text.

 3.  See The Discourses One, II, Note 3. 

Return to text.

 4.  Now called Hieron. 

Return to text.

 5.  See The Discourses One, LVIII, Note 2. 

Return to text.

 6.  Corcyra is now Corfu. The incident referred to occurred in 427 b.c. 

Return to text.

 7.  Papirius Cursor: a general in the Samnite wars which came to an end in

290 b.c. 
Return to text.

BOOK THREE, 21

  1.    In the previous discourse, Machiavelli showed that victories have

sometimes been won by acts of kindness rather than by acts of terror or
force of arms. 
Return to text.

 2.  He took poison in order to avoid being turned over to the Romans by

the King of Bythnia. 
Return to text.

 3.  In Discourses Three, 22, Machiavelli compares two Roman generals of

equal stature but contrary temperament. Manlius Torquatus was harsh
and demanding with his soldiers, while Valerius Corvinus was mild
and considerate. He praises the conduct of both men, but points out
that since the method used by Torquatus could not win the affection of
his soldiers, it was particularly suitable for a general serving a
republic. Corvinus' method, on the other hand, was particularly
suitable for a prince whose status would demand a soldiery personally
loyal to him; such a method, Machiavelli adds, could result in danger
to a republic. 
Return to text.

BOOK THREE, 41

 1.  In the previous discourse, Machiavelli told how the Samnites tricked a

Roman army into the Caudine Forks (321 b.c.), where it was encircled.
Return to text.

SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY

The following books, all in English or English translation, will be helpful to

the reader wishing further information on Machiavelli, his age, and his
influence: 

Barincou, Edmond. Machiavelli, trans. Helen R. Lind, Evergreen
Profile Book 23. New York: Grove, 1961.

Baron, Hans. Crisis of the Early Italian Renaissance. Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1955.

Bondanella, Peter E. Machiavelli and the Art of Renaissance
History. Detroit: Wayne State University Press, 1973.

Burckhardt, Jacob. The Civilization of the Italian Renaissance.
Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1960.

Butterfield, Herbert. The Statecraft of Machiavelli. London: Bell,
1940.

Cassirer, Ernst. The Myth of the State. New Haven: Yale
University Press, 1973.

Chabod, Federico. Machiavelli and the Renaissance, trans. David
Moore. New York: Harper & Row, 1958.

Fleisher, Martin, ed. Machiavelli and the Nature of Political
Thought. New York: Atheneum, 1972.

Gilbert, Allen H. Machiavelli's Prince and Its Forerunners.
Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1938.

Gilbert, Felix. Machiavelli and Guicciardini: Politics and History
in Sixteenth-Century Florence. Princeton: Princeton University
Press, 1965.

Gilmore, Myron P., ed. Studies on Machiavelli. Florence: Sansoni,
1972.

Hale, John Rigby. Machiavelli and Renaissance Italy. New York:
Macmillan, 1960.

Hexter, Jack H. The Vision of Politics on the Eve of the
Reformation: More, Machiavelli, and Seyssel. New York: Basic
Books, 1973.

Jensen, De Lamer, ed. Machiavelli: Cynic, Patriot or Political
Scientist? Boston: Heath, 1960.

Mattingly, Garrett. Renaissance Diplomacy. London: Cape, 1955.

Mazzeo, Joseph Anthony. Renaissance and Seventeenth-Century
Studies. New York: Columbia University Press, 1964.

Meinecke, Friedrich. Machiavellism, trans. Douglas Scott. New
Haven: Yale University Press, 1957.

Parel, Anthony, ed. The Political Calculus: Essays on
Machiavelli's Philosophy. Toronto: University of Toronto Press,
1972.

Pocock, John Greville Agard. The Machiavellian Moment:
Florentine Political Thought and the Atlantic Republican Tradition.
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1974.

Prezzolini, Giuseppe. Machiavelli, trans. Gioconda Savini. New
York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 1967.

Raab, Felix. The English Face of Machiavelli, A Changing
Interpretation, 1500—1700. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul,
1964.

Ridolfi, Roberto. The Life of Niccolò Machiavelli, trans. Cecil
Grayson. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1963.

Roeder, Ralph. The Man of the Renaissance: Four Lawgivers:
Savonarola, Machiavelli, Castiglione, Aretino. New York: Viking,
1933.

Rubinstein, Nicolai. The Government of Florence Under the
Medici 1434—1494. New York: Oxford University Press, 1960.

Schevill, Ferdinand. A History of Florence. New York: Harcourt
Brace, 1936.

Strauss, Leo. Thoughts on Machiavelli. Seattle: University of
Washington Press, 1958.

Villari, Pasquale. The Life and Times of Niccolò Machiavelli,
trans. Linda Villari, rev. ed. New York: Greenwood Press, 1968.

Wolin, Sheldon S. The Economy of Violence. Boston: Little,
Brown, 1960.

BANTAM CLASSICS

beowulf and other old english poems,

0-553-21347-4

the bhagavad-gita: krishna's counsel in time of war,

0-553-21365-2

the declaration of independence

and

the constitution of the united states,

0-553-21482-9

the federalist papers,

0-553-21340-7

greek drama,

0-553-21221-4

jo's boys,

Louisa May Alcott, 0-553-21449-7

little women,

Louisa May Alcott, 0-553-21275-3

winesburg, ohio,

Sherwood Anderson, 0-553-21439-X

the complete plays,

Aristophanes, 0-553-21343-1

emma,

Jane Austen, 0-553-21273-7

mansfield park,

Jane Austen, 0-553-21276-1

northanger abbey,

Jane Austen, 0-553-21197-8

persuasion,

Jane Austen, 0-553-21137-4

pride and prejudice,

Jane Austen, 0-553-21310-5

sense and sensibility,

Jane Austen, 0-553-21334-2

peter pan, J. M.

Barrie, 0-553-21178-1

bradbury classic stories,

Ray Bradbury, 0-553-28637-4

the martian chronicles,

Ray Bradbury, 0-553-27822-3

jane eyre,

Charlotte Brontë, 0-553-21140-4

villette,

Charlotte Brontë, 0-553-21243-5

wuthering heights,

Emily Brontë, 0-553-21258-3

the secret garden,

Frances Hodgson Burnett, 0-553-21201-X

alice's adventures in wonderland

and

through the looking-glass,

Lewis Carroll, 0-553-21345-8

my antonia,

Willa Cather, 0-553-21418-7

o pioneers!,

Willa Cather, 0-553-21358-X

the canterbury tales,

Geoffrey Chaucer, 0-553-21082-3

stories,

Anton Chekhov, 0-553-38100-8

the awakening and selected short stories,

Kate Chopin, 0-553-21330-X

the woman in white,

Wilkie Collins, 0-553-21263-X

heart of darkness

and

the secret sharer,

Joseph Conrad, 0-553-21214-1

lord jim,

Joseph Conrad, 0-553-21361-X

the deerslayer,

James Fenimore Cooper, 0-553-21085-8

the last of the mohicans,

James Fenimore Cooper, 0-553-21329-6

maggie: a girl of the streets and other short fiction,

Stephen Crane, 0-553-21355-5

the red badge of courage,

Stephen Crane, 0-553-21011-4

the inferno,

Dante, 0-553-21339-3

paradiso,

Dante, 0-553-21204-4

purgatorio,

Dante, 0-553-21344-X

the origin of species,

Charles Darwin, 0-553-21463-2

moll flanders,

Daniel Defoe, 0-553-21328-8

robinson crusoe,

Daniel Defoe, 0-553-21373-3

bleak house,

Charles Dickens, 0-553-21223-0

a christmas carol,

Charles Dickens, 0-553-21244-3

david copperfield,

Charles Dickens, 0-553-21189-7

great expectations,

Charles Dickens, 0-553-21342-3

hard times,

Charles Dickens, 0-553-21016-5

oliver twist,

Charles Dickens, 0-553-21102-1

the pickwick papers,

Charles Dickens, 0-553-21123-4

a tale of two cities,

Charles Dickens, 0-553-21176-5

three soldiers,

John Dos Passos, 0-553-21456-X

the brothers karamazov,

Fyodor Dostoevsky, 0-553-21216-8

crime and punishment,

Fyodor Dostoevsky, 0-553-21175-7

the eternal husband and other stories,

Fyodor Dostoevsky, 0-553-21444-6

the idiot,

Fyodor Dostoevsky, 0-553-21352-0

notes from underground,

Fyodor Dostoevsky, 0-553-21144-7

sherlock holmes vol i,

Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, 0-553-21241-9

sherlock holmes vol ii,

Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, 0-553-21242-7

sister carrie,

Theodore Dreiser, 0-553-21374-1

the souls of black folk,

W. E. B. Du Bois, 0-553-21336-9

the count of monte cristo,

Alexandre Dumas, 0-553-21350-4

the three musketeers,

Alexandre Dumas, 0-553-21337-7

middlemarch,

George Eliot, 0-553-21180-3

silas marner,

George Eliot, 0-553-21229-X

selected essays, lectures, and poems,

Ralph Waldo Emerson, 0-553-21388-1

ten plays by euripides,

Euripides, 0-553-21363-6

april morning,

Howard Fast, 0-553-27322-1

madame bovary,

Gustave Flaubert, 0-553-21341-5

howards end,

E. M. Forster, 0-553-21208-7

a room with a view,

E. M. Forster, 0-553-21323-7

the diary of a young girl,

Anne Frank, 0-553-57712-3

anne frank's tales from the secret annex,

Anne Frank, 0-553-58638-6

the autobiography and other writings,

Benjamin Franklin, 0-553-21075-0

the yellow wallpaper and other writings,

Charlotte Perkins Gilman, 0-553-21375-X

faust: first part,

Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, 0-553-21348-2

the wind in the willows,

Kenneth Grahame, 0-553-21368-7

the complete fairy tales of the brothers grimm,

The Brothers Grimm, 0-553-38216-0

roots,

Alex Haley, 0-440-17464-3

far from the madding crowd,

Thomas Hardy, 0-553-21331-8

jude the obscure,

Thomas Hardy, 0-553-21191-9

the mayor of casterbridge,

Thomas Hardy, 0-553-21024-6

the return of the native,

Thomas Hardy, 0-553-21269-9

tess of the d'urbervilles,

Thomas Hardy, 0-553-21168-4

the house of the seven gables,

Nathaniel Hawthorne, 0-553-21270-2

the scarlet letter,

Nathaniel Hawthorne, 0-553-21009-2

the fairy tales of hermann hesse,

Hermann Hesse, 0-553-37776-0

siddhartha,

Hermann Hesse, 0-553-20884-5

the odyssey of homer,

Homer, 0-553-21399-7

the hunchback of notre dame,

Victor Hugo, 0-553-21370-9

four great plays: a doll's house, ghosts, an enemy of the people, and the
wild duck,

Henrik Ibsen, 0-553-21280-X

the portrait of a lady,

Henry James, 0-553-21127-7

the turn of the screw and other short fiction,

Henry James, 0-553-21059-9

a country doctor,

Sarah Orne Jewett, 0-553-21498-5

dubliners,

James Joyce, 0-553-21380-6

a portrait of the artist as a young man,

James Joyce, 0-553-21404-7

the metamorphosis,

Franz Kafka, 0-553-21369-5

the story of my life,

Helen Keller, 0-553-21387-3

captains courageous,

Rudyard Kipling, 0-553-21190-0

the jungle books,

Rudyard Kipling, 0-553-21199-4

kim,

Rudyard Kipling, 0-553-21332-6

a separate peace,

John Knowles, 0-553-28041-4

lady chatterley's lover,

D. H. Lawrence, 0-553-21262-1

sons and lovers,

D. H. Lawrence, 0-553-21192-7

women in love,

D. H. Lawrence, 0-553-21454-3

inherit the wind,

Jerome Lawrence, 0-553-26915-1

the night thoreau spent in jail,

Jerome Lawrence, 0-553-27838-X

the phantom of the opera,

Gaston Leroux, 0-553-21376-8

babbitt,

Sinclair Lewis, 0-553-21486-1

main street,

Sinclair Lewis, 0-553-21451-9

the call of the wild and white fang,

Jack London, 0-553-21233-8

the sea wolf,

Jack London, 0-553-21225-7

to build a fire and other stories,

Jack London, 0-553-21335-0

the prince,

Niccolò Machiavelli, 0-553-21278-8

death in venice and other stories,

Thomas Mann, 0-553-21333-4

the communist manifesto,

Karl Marx & Friedrich Engels, 0-553-21406-3

of human bondage,

W. Somerset Maugham, 0-553-21392-X

the ballad of the sad cafe

and

other stories,

Carson McCullers, 0-553-27254-3

the heart is a lonely hunter,

Carson McCullers, 0-553-26963-1

the member of the wedding,

Carson McCullers, 0-553-25051-5

billy budd, sailor and other stories,

Herman Melville, 0-553-21274-5

moby-dick,

Herman Melville, 0-553-21311-3

on liberty and utilitarianism,

John Stuart Mill, 0-553-21414-4

the annotated milton,

John Milton, 0-553-58110-4

the scarlet pimpernel,

Baroness Emmuska Orczy, 0-553-21402-0

the dialogues of plato,

Plato, 0-553-21371-7

the tell-tale heart and other writings,

Edgar Allan Poe, 0-553-21228-1

cyrano de bergerac,

Edmond Rostand, 0-553-21360-1

ivanhoe,

Sir Walter Scott, 0-553-21326-1

the complete works of shakespeare

(28 vols.)

pygmalion

and

major barbara,

George Bernard Shaw, 0-553-21408-X

frankenstein,

Mary Shelley, 0-553-21247-8

the jungle,

Upton Sinclair, 0-553-21245-1

one day in the life of ivan denisovich,

Alexander Solzhenitsyn, 0-553-24777-8

the complete plays of sophocles,

Sophocles, 0-553-21354-7

dr. jekyll and mr. hyde,

Robert Louis Stevenson, 0-553-21277-X

kidnapped,

Robert Louis Stevenson, 0-553-21260-5

treasure island,

Robert Louis Stevenson, 0-553-21249-4

dracula,

Bram Stoker, 0-553-21271-0

uncle tom's cabin,

Harriet Beecher Stowe, 0-553-21218-4

gulliver's travels and other writings,

Jonathan Swift, 0-553-21232-X

vanity fair,

William Makepeace Thackeray, 0-553-21462-4

walden and other writings,

Henry David Thoreau, 0-553-21246-X

democracy in america,

Alexis de Tocqueville, 0-553-21464-0

anna karenina,

Leo Tolstoy, 0-553-21346-6

the death of ivan ilyich,

Leo Tolstoy, 0-553-21035-1

the adventures of huckleberry finn,

Mark Twain, 0-553-21079-3

the adventures of tom sawyer,

Mark Twain, 0-553-21128-5

the complete short stories of mark twain,

Mark Twain, 0-553-21195-1

a connecticut yankee in king arthur's court,

Mark Twain, 0-553-21143-9

life on the mississippi,

Mark Twain, 0-553-21349-0

the prince and the pauper,

Mark Twain, 0-553-21256-7

pudd'nhead wilson,

Mark Twain, 0-553-21158-7

20,000

leagues under the sea,

Jules Verne, 0-553-21252-4

around the world in eighty days,

Jules Verne, 0-553-21356-3

from the earth to the moon,

Jules Verne, 0-553-21420-9

the aeneid of virgil,

Virgil, 0-553-21041-6

candide,

Voltaire, 0-553-21166-8

the invisible man,

H. G. Wells, 0-553-21353-9

the island of dr. moreau,

H. G. Wells, 0-553-21432-2

the time machine,

H. G. Wells, 0-553-21351-2

the war of the worlds,

H. G. Wells, 0-553-21338-5

the age of innocence,

Edith Wharton, 0-553-21450-0

the custom of the country,

Edith Wharton, 0-553-21393-8

ethan frome and other short fiction,

Edith Wharton, 0-553-21255-9

the house of mirth,

Edith Wharton, 0-553-21320-2

summer,

Edith Wharton, 0-553-21422-5

leaves of grass,

Walt Whitman, 0-553-21116-1

the accident,

Elie Wiesel, 0-553-58170-8

dawn,

Elie Wiesel, 0-553-22536-7

night,

Elie Wiesel, 0-553-27253-5

the picture of dorian gray and other writings,

Oscar Wilde, 0-553-21254-0

the swiss family robinson,

Johann David Wyss, 0-553-21403-9

early african-american classics,

0-553-21379-2

fifty great short stories,

0-553-27745-6

fifty great american short stories,

0-553-27294-2

short shorts,

0-553-27440-6

great american short stories,

0-440-33060-2

short story masterpieces,

0-440-37864-8

the voice that is great within us,

0-553-26263-7

the black poets,

0-553-27563-1

three centuries of american poetry,

(Trade) 0-553-37518-0, (Hardcover) 0-553-10250-8

THE PRINCE AND SELECTED DISCOURSES

A Bantam Book

PUBLISHING HISTORY

The Prince was first published in 1513

First Bantam publication / October 1966

Bantam Classic edition / March 1981

Bantam Classic reissue / January 2003

Published by

Bantam Dell

A Division of Random House, Inc.

New York, New York

All rights reserved

Translation copyright 1966 Bantam Books

Cover art: “Portrait of a Youth”; Botticelli; National Gallery of Art,

Washington; Andrew W. Mellon Collection

Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 66-25554

No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted in any form

or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying,

recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system,

without the written permission of the publisher, except where permitted

by law. For information address: Bantam Books, New York, New York.

Bantam Books and the rooster colophon are registered trademarks of Random House, Inc.

Manufactured in the United States of America

Published simultaneously in Canada

www.bantamdell.com

eISBN: 978-0-553-89737-1

v3.0

